
Executive Summary
Global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions continued to rise to 
2019: the aggregate reductions implied by current Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) to 2030 would still make 
it impossible to limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited 
overshoot, and would only be compatible with likely limiting 
warming below 2°C if followed by much steeper decline, hence 
limiting warming to either level implies accelerated mitigation 
actions at all scales (robust evidence,  high agreement). Since 
the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), important changes that 
have emerged include the specific objectives established in the Paris 
Agreement of 2015 (for temperature, adaptation and finance), rising 
climate impacts, and higher levels of societal awareness and support for 
climate action. The growth of global GHG emissions has slowed over the 
past decade, and delivering the updated NDCs to 2030 would turn this 
into decline, but the implied global emissions by 2030 exceed pathways 
consistent with 1.5°C by a large margin, and are near the upper end of 
the range of modelled pathways which keep temperatures likely limit 
warming to 2°C (with >65% probability). Continuing investments in 
carbon-intensive activities at scale will heighten the multitude of risks 
associated with climate change and impede societal and industrial 
transformation towards low-carbon development. Meeting the long-
term temperature objective in the Paris Agreement therefore implies 
a rapid turn to an accelerating decline of GHG emissions towards ‘net 
zero’, which is implausible without urgent and ambitious action at all 
scales. The unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic has had far-reaching 
impacts on the global economic and social system, and recovery will 
present both challenges and opportunities for climate mitigation. {1.2, 
1.3, 1.5, 1.6, Chapters 3 and 4}
While there are some trade-offs, effective and equitable 
climate policies are largely compatible with the broader goal 
of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty 
as enshrined in the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
(robust evidence, high agreement). Climate mitigation is one 
of many goals that societies pursue in the context of sustainable 
development, as evidenced by the wide range of the SDGs. Climate 
mitigation has synergies and/or trade-offs with many other SDGs. 
There has been a strong relationship between development and GHG 
emissions, as historically both per capita and absolute emissions 
have risen with industrialisation. However, recent evidence shows 
countries can grow their economies while reducing emissions. 
Countries have different priorities in achieving the SDGs and reducing 
emissions as informed by their respective national conditions and 
capabilities. Given the differences in GHG emissions contributions, 
degree of vulnerabilities and impacts, as well as capacities within and 
between nations, equity and justice are important considerations for 
effective climate policy and for securing national and international 
support for deep decarbonisation. Achieving sustainable global 
development and eradicating poverty as enshrined in the 17 SDGS 
would involve effective and equitable climate policies at all levels 
from local to global scale. Failure to address questions of equity 
and justice over time can undermine social cohesion and stability. 
International cooperation can enhance efforts to achieve ambitious 
global climate mitigation in the context of sustainable development. 
{1.4, 1.6, Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5, 13 and 17}The transition to a  low-carbon economy depends on 
a wide range of closely intertwined drivers and constraints, 
including policies and technologies where notable advances 
over the past decade have opened up new and large-scale 
opportunities for deep decarbonisation, and for alternative 
development pathways which could deliver multiple social and 
developmental goals (robust evidence, medium agreement). 
Drivers for and constraints against low-carbon societal transition 
comprise economic and technological factors (the means by which 
services such as food, heating and shelter are provided and for whom, 
the emissions intensity of traded products, finance, and investment), 
socio-political issues (political economy, equity and fairness, 
social innovation and behaviour change), and institutional factors 
(legal framework and institutions, and the quality of international 
cooperation). In addition to being deeply intertwined all the factors 
matter to varying degrees, depending on the prevailing social, 
economic, cultural and political context. They often exert both push 
and pull forces at the same time, within and across different scales. 
The development and deployment of innovative technologies and 
systems at scale are important for achieving deep decarbonisation. 
In recent years, the cost of several low-carbon technologies has 
declined sharply, alongside rapid deployment. Over 20 countries 
have also sustained emission reductions, and many more have 
accelerated energy efficiency and/or land-use improvements. Overall, 
however, the global contribution is so far modest, at a few billion 
tonnes (tCO2-eq) of avoided emissions annually. {1.3, 1.4, Chapters 2, 
4, 13 and 14}
Accelerating mitigation to prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference within the climate system will require the 
integration of broadened assessment frameworks and tools 
that combine multiple perspectives, applied in a  context of 
multi-level governance (robust evidence, medium agreement). 
Analysing a  challenge on the scale of fully decarbonising our 
economies entails integration of multiple analytic frameworks. 
Approaches to risk assessment and resilience, established across 
IPCC Working Groups, are complemented by frameworks for probing 
the challenges in implementing mitigation. Aggregate frameworks 
include cost-effectiveness analysis towards given objectives, and 
cost-benefit analysis, both of which have been developing to take 
fuller account of advances in understanding risks and innovation, 
the dynamics of emitting systems and of climate impacts, and 
welfare economic theory including growing consensus on long-term 
discounting. Ethical frameworks consider the fairness of processes 
and outcomes which can help ameliorate distributional impacts 
across income groups, countries and generations. Transition and 
transformation frameworks explain and evaluate the dynamics of 
transitions to low-carbon systems arising from interactions amongst 
levels, with inevitable resistance from established socio-technical 
structures. Psychological, behavioural and political frameworks 
outline the constraints (and opportunities) arising from human 
psychology and the power of incumbent interests. A comprehensive 
understanding of climate mitigation must combine these multiple 
frameworks. Together with established risk frameworks, collectively 
these help to explain potential synergies and trade-offs in mitigation, 
imply a  need for a  wide portfolio of policies attuned to different 
strategies in diverse contexts. {1.2.2, 1.7, 1.8}
The speed, direction and depth of any transition will be 
determined by choices in the, environmental, technological, 
economic, socio-cultural and institutional realms (robust 
evidence, high agreement). Transitions in specific systems can be 
gradual or rapid and disruptive. The pace of a transition can be impeded 
by ‘lock-in’ generated by existing physical capital, institutions, and 
social norms. The interaction between power, politics and economy 
is central in explaining why broad commitments do not always 
translate to urgent action. At the same time, attention to and support 
for climate policies and low-carbon societal transition has generally 
increased, as the impacts have become more salient. Both public and 
private financing and financial structures strongly affect the scale 
and balance of high- and low-carbon investments. COVID-19 has 
strained public finances, and integrating climate finance into ongoing 
recovery strategies, nationally and internationally, can accelerate the 
diffusion of low-carbon technologies and also help poorer countries 
to minimise future stranded assets. Societal and behavioural norms, 
regulations and institutions are essential conditions to accelerate 
low-carbon transitions in multiple sectors, whilst addressing 
distributional concerns endemic to any major transition. {1.3.3, 1.4, 
1.8, Chapters 2, 4 and 15, and Cross-Chapter Box 1 in this chapter}
Achieving the global transition to a  low-carbon, climate-
resilient and sustainable world requires purposeful and 
increasingly coordinated planning and decisions at many 
scales of governance including local, sub-national, national 
and global levels (robust evidence, high agreement). 
Accelerating mitigation globally would imply strengthening policies 
adopted to date, expanding the effort across options, sectors, and 
countries, and broadening responses to include more diverse actors 
and societal processes at multiple – including international – levels. 
Effective governance of climate change entails strong action across 
multiple jurisdictions and decision-making levels, including regular 
evaluation and learning. Choices that cause climate change as well 
as the processes for making and implementing relevant decisions 
involve a range of non-nation state actors such as cities, businesses, 
and civil society organisations. At global, national and sub-national 
levels, climate change actions are interwoven with and embedded 
in the context of much broader social, economic and political goals. 
Therefore, the governance required to address climate change has to 
navigate power, political, economic, and social dynamics at all levels 
of decision-making. Effective climate-governing institutions,  and 
openness to experimentation on a  variety of institutional 
arrangements, policies and programmes can play a  vital role in 
engaging stakeholders and building momentum for effective climate 
action. {1.4, 1.9, Chapters 8, 15 and 17}
This report (AR6 WGIII) aims to assess new literature on climate 
mitigation including implications for global sustainable development. 
In this Sixth Assessment Cycle the IPCC has also published three 
Special Reports,1 all of which emphasise the rising threat of climate 
change and the implications for more ambitious mitigation efforts 
at all scales. At the same time, the Paris Agreement (PA) and the UN 

Development Goals (SDGs), both adopted in 2015, set out a globally 
agreed agenda within which climate mitigation efforts must be 
located. Along with a better understanding of the physical science 
basis of climate change (AR6 WGI), and vulnerabilities, impacts, 
and adaptation (AR6 WGII), the landscape of climate mitigation has 
evolved substantially since the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5).
Since (IPCC 2014a), climate mitigation policies around the world 
have grown in both number and shape (Chapter 13). However, while 
the average rate of annual increase of CO 2 emissions has declined 
(Section 1.3.2), GHG emissions globally continued to rise, underlining 
the urgency of the mitigation challenge (Chapters  2 and 3). Over 

economic growth, but the scale of mitigation action across countries 
remains varied and is generally much slower than the pace required 
to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement (Sections 1.3.2 and 2.7.2). 
Per capita GHG emissions between countries even at similar stages 
of economic development (based on GDP per capita) vary by a factor 
of three (Figure 1.6) and by more than two on consumption basis 
(Section 2.3).
The Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) underlined 
that humanity is now living with the ‘unifying lens of the 
Anthropocene’ (IPCC 2018a, pp. 52–53), that requires a sharpened 
focus on the impact of human activity on the climate system and the 
planet more broadly given ‘planetary boundaries’ (Steffen et al. 2015) 
including interdependencies of climate change and biodiversity 
(Dasgupta 2021). Recent literature assessed by Working Groups I and 
II of this AR6 underlines the urgency of climate action as cumulative 
CO2 emissions, along with other greenhouses gases (GHGs), drives 
the temperature change. Across AR6, global temperature changes 
are defined relative to the period 1850–1900, as in SR1.5 and 
collaboration with WGI enabled the use of AR6-calibrated emulators 
to assure consistency across the three Working Groups. The remaining 
‘carbon budgets’ (see Annex I: Glossary) associated with 1.5°C and 
2°C temperature targets equate to about one (for 1.5°C) to three 
(for 2°C) decades of current emissions, as from 2020, but with 
significant variation depending on multiple factors including other 
gases (Figure 2.7, and Cross-Working Group Box 1 in Chapter 3). For 
an outline of the WGIII approach to mitigation scenarios, emission 
pathways implied by the Paris goals, and the timing of peak and ‘net 
zero’ (see Glossary and FAQ 1.3), see Section 1.5 and Chapter 3.

2019b); and the Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) (IPCC 2019c).Strong differences remain in responsibilities for, and capabilities to, 
take climate action within and between countries. These differences, 
as well as differences in the impact of climate change, point to the 
role of collective action in achieving urgent and ambitious global 
climate mitigation in the context of sustainable development, with 
attention to issues of equity and fairness as highlighted in several 
chapters of the report (Chapters 4, 5, 14, 15 and 17).
Innovation and industrial development of key technologies in 
several relevant sectors have transformed prospects for mitigation 
at much lower cost than previously assessed (Chapters  2 and 
6–12). Large reductions in the cost of widely available renewable 
energy technologies, along with energy efficient technologies and 
behavioural changes (Chapters 5 and 9–11), can enable societies to 
provide services with much lower emissions. However, there are still 
significant differences in the ability to access and utilise low-carbon 
technologies across the world (Chapters 4, 15 and 16). New actors, 
including cities, businesses, and numerous non-state transnational 
alliances have emerged as important players in the global effort to 
tackle climate change (Chapters 13–16).
Along with continued development of concepts, models and 
technologies, there have been numerous insights from both the 
successes and failures of mitigation action that can inform future 
policy design and climate action. However, to date, policies and 
investments are still clearly inadequate to put the world in line with 
the PA’s aims (Chapters 13 and 15).
The greater the inertia in emission trends and carbon-intensive 
investments, the more that CO 2 will continue to accumulate (Hilaire 
et al. 2019; IPCC 2019a). Overall, the literature points to the need for 
a more dynamic consideration of intertwined challenges concerning 
the transformation of key GHG-emitting systems: to minimise 
the trade-offs, and maximise the synergies, of delivering deep 
decarbonisation whilst enhancing sustainable development.
This chapter introduces readers to the AR6 WGIII Report and provides 
an overview of progress and challenges, in three parts. Part  A 
(1.1–1.5) introduces the climate mitigation challenge, provides key 
findings and developments since previous assessment, and reviews 
the main drivers for, and constraints against accelerated climate 
action. Part B (1.6–1.8) provides an assessment of the key frameworks 
for understanding the climate mitigation challenge covering broad 
approaches such as sustainable development and more specific 
economic, political and ethical framings. Part C  (1.9–1.12) briefly 
highlights the role of governance for steering and coordinating efforts 
to accelerate globally effective and equitable climate mitigation, 
notes the gaps in knowledge that have been identified in the process 
of assessment, and provides a road map to the rest of the report.
1.2.1 Key Findings from Previous Assessment Reports
Successive WGIII IPCC assessments have emphasised the importance 
of climate mitigation along with the need to consider broader societal 
goals especially sustainable development. Key insights from AR5 and 
the subsequent three Special Reports (IPCC 2018b, 2019b, 2019c) are 
summarised below.
The AR5 projected that in baseline scenarios (i.e., based on prevailing 
trends without explicit additional mitigation efforts), agriculture, 
forestry and other land use (AFOLU) would be the only sector where 
emissions could fall by 2100, with some CO 2 removal (IPCC 2014b, 
p. 17). Direct CO 2 emissions from energy were projected to double 
or even triple by 2050 (IPCC 2014b, p. 20) due to global population 
and economic growth, resulting in global mean surface temperature 
increases in 2100 from 3.7°C to 4.8°C compared to pre-industrial 
levels. The AR5 noted that mitigation effort and the costs associated 
with ambitious mitigation differ significantly across countries, and in 
‘globally cost-effective’ scenarios, the biggest reductions (relative to 
projections) occur in the countries with the highest future emissions 
in the baseline scenarios (IPCC 2014b, p. 17). Since most physical 
capital (e.g.,  power plants, buildings, transport infrastructure) 
involved in GHG emissions is long-lived, the timing of the shift in 
investments and strategies will be crucial (IPCC 2014b, p. 18).
A key message from recent Special Reports is the urgency to mitigate 
GHG emissions in order to avoid rapid and potentially irreversible 
changes in natural and human systems (IPCC 2018b, 2019b, 2019c). 
Successive IPCC reports have drawn upon increasing sophistication 
of modelling tools to project emissions in the absence of ambitious 
decarbonisation action, as well as the emission pathways that meet 
long-term temperature targets. The SR1.5 examined pathways limiting 
warming to 1.5°C, compared to the historical baseline of 1850–1900, 
finding that ‘in pathways with no or limited overshoot of 1.5°C, 
global net anthropogenic CO 2 emissions decline by about 45% from 

interquartile range); with ‘overshoot’ referring to higher temperatures, 
then brought down by 2100 through ‘net negative’ emissions. It 
found this would require rapid and far-reaching transitions in energy, 
land, urban and infrastructure (including transport and buildings), 
and industrial systems (high confidence) (IPCC 2018b).
The SR1.5 found that the Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) as declared under the Paris Agreement (PA) would not limit 
warming to 1.5°C; despite significant updates to NDCs in 2020/21, 
this remains the case, although delivery of these more ambitious 
NDCs would somewhat enhance the prospects for staying below 2°C 
(Section 1.3.3).
The AR5 WGIII and the Special Reports analysed economic costs 
associated with climate action. The estimates vary widely depending 
on the assumptions made as to how ordered the transition is, 
temperature target, technology availability, and the metric or model 
used, among others (Chapter 6). Modelled direct mitigation costs of 
pathways to 1.5°C, with no/limited overshoot, span a wide range, but were typically three to four times higher than in pathways to 
2°C (high confidence), before taking account of benefits, including 
significant reduction in loss of life and livelihoods, and avoided 
climate impacts (IPCC 2018b).
Successive IPCC reports highlight a  strong connection between 
climate mitigation and sustainable development. Climate 
mitigation and adaptation goals have synergies and trade-offs 
with efforts to achieve sustainable development, including poverty 
eradication. A comprehensive assessment of climate policy therefore 
involves going beyond a  narrow focus on specific mitigation and 
adaptation options to incorporate climate issues into the design of 
comprehensive strategies for equitable sustainable development. At 
the same time, some climate mitigation policies can run counter to 
sustainable development and eradicating poverty, which highlights 
the need to consider trade-offs alongside benefits. Examples include 
synergies between climate policy and improved air quality, reducing 
premature deaths and morbidity (IPCC 2014b, Figure SPM.6) (AR6 
WGI Sections 6.6.3 and 6.7.3), but there would be trade-offs if policy 
raises net energy bills, with distributional implications. The Special 
Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) also emphasises 
important synergies and trade-offs, bringing new light on the link 
between healthy and sustainable food consumption and emissions 
caused by the agricultural sector. Land-related responses that 
contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation can also 
combat desertification and land degradation, and enhance food 
security (IPCC 2019a).
Previous Assessment Reports (ARs) have detailed the contribution 
of various sectors and activities to global GHG emissions. When 
indirect emissions (mainly from electricity, heat and other energy 
conversions) are included, the four main consumption (end-use) 
drivers are industry, AFOLU, buildings and transport  (Figure  2.14), 
though the magnitude of these emissions can vary widely between 
countries. These – together with the energy and urban systems which 
feed and shape end-use sectors – define the sectoral chapters in this 
AR6 WGIII report.
Estimates of emissions associated with production and transport 
of internationally traded goods were first presented in AR5 WGIII, 
which estimated the ‘embodied emission transfers’ from upper-
middle-income countries to industrialised countries through trade at 
about 10% of CO 2 emissions in each of these groups (IPCC 2014a, 
Figure TS.5). The literature on this and discussion on their accounting 
has grown substantially since then (Chapters 2 and 8).
The atmosphere is a shared global resource and an integral part of 
the ‘global commons’. In the depletion/restoration of this resource, 
myriad actors at various scales are involved, for instance, individuals, 
communities, firms and states. Inter alia, international cooperation to 
tackle ozone depletion and acid rain offer useful examples. The AR5 
noted that greater cooperation would ensue if policies are perceived 
as fair and equitable by all countries along the spectrum of economic 
development – implying a need for equitable sharing of the effort. 
A  key takeaway from AR5 is that climate policy involves value 
judgement and ethics. (IPCC 2014a Box TS.1: ‘People and countries 
have rights and owe duties towards each other. These are matters 
moral and political philosophy, jurisprudence, and economics.’ p. 37). 
International cooperation and collective action on climate change 
alongside local, national, regional and global policies will be crucial 
to solve the problem, and this report notes cooperative approaches 
beyond simple ‘global commons’ framings (Chapters 13 and 14).
The AR5 (all Working Group reports) also underlined that climate 
policy inherently involves risk and uncertainty (in nature, economy, 
society and individuals). To help evaluate responses, there exists 
a  rich suite of analytical tools, for example, cost-benefit analysis, 
cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-criteria analysis, expected utility 
theory, and catastrophe and risk models. All have pros and cons, and 
have been further developed in subsequent literature and in AR6 
(Sections 1.2.2 and 1.7).
Recent assessments (IPCC 2014a, 2018b) began to consider the role 
of individual behavioural choices and cultural norms in driving energy 
and food patterns. Notably, SR1.5 (Section 4.4.3) outlined emerging 
evidence on the potential for changes in behaviour, lifestyle and 
culture to contribute to decarbonisation (and lower the cost); for the 
first time, AR6 devotes a whole chapter (Chapter 5) to consider these 
and other underlying drivers of energy demand, food choices and 
social aspects.
1.2.2 Developments in Climate Science, 
Impacts and Risk
The assessment of the Physical Science Basis (IPCC AR6 WGI) 
documents sustained and widespread changes in the atmosphere, 
cryosphere, biosphere and ocean, providing unequivocal evidence of 
a  world that has warmed, associated with rising atmospheric CO 2 
concentrations reaching levels not experienced in at least the last 

human-induced changes beyond natural variations include 
declines in Arctic Sea ice and glaciers, thawing of permafrost, and 
a  strengthening of the global water cycle (AR6 WGI SPM A.2, B.3 
and B.4). Oceanic changes include rising sea level, acidification, 
deoxygenation, and changing salinity (WGI SPM B.3). Over land, in 
recent decades, both frequency and severity have increased for hot 
extremes but decreased for cold extremes; intensification of heavy 
precipitation is observed in parallel with a  decrease in available 
water in dry seasons, along with an increased occurrence of weather 
conditions that promote wildfires.
In defining the objective of international climate negotiations as 
being to ‘prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference’ (UNFCCC 
1992, Art. 2), the UNFCCC underlines the centrality of risk framing 
in considering the threats of climate change and potential response 
measures. Against the background of ‘unequivocal’ (AR4) evidence of 
human-induced climate change, and the growing experience of direct 
impacts, the IPCC has sought to systematise a robust approach to risk 
and risk management.In AR6 the IPCC employs a  common risk framing across all three 
working groups and provides guidance for more consistent and 
transparent usage (AR6 WGI Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1; AR6 
WGII Section  1.4.1; IPCC risk guidance). AR6 defines risk as ‘the 
potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, 
recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated with 
such systems’ (Annex I), encompassing risks from both potential 
impacts of climate change and human responses to it (Reisinger et al. 
2020). The risk framing includes steps for identifying, evaluating, 
and prioritising current and future risks; for understanding the 
interactions among different sources of risk; for distributing effort 
and equitable sharing of risks; for monitoring and adjusting actions 
over time while continuing to assess changing circumstances; and 
for communications among analysts, decision-makers, and the public.
Climate change risk assessments face challenges including a tendency 
to mischaracterise risks and pay insufficient attention to the potential 
for surprises (Weitzman 2011; Aven and Renn 2015; Stoerk et al. 
2018). Concepts of resilience and vulnerability provide overlapping, 
alternative entry points to understanding and addressing the societal 
challenges caused and exacerbated by climate change (AR6 WGII, 
Section 1.2.1).
The AR6 WGII devotes a full chapter (Chapter 17) to ‘Decision-Making 
Options for Managing Risk’, detailing the analytic approaches 
and drawing upon the Cynefin classification of known, knowable, 
complex and chaotic systems (Section 17.3.1). With deep uncertainty, 
risk management often aims to identify specific combinations of 
response actions and enabling institutions that increase the potential 
for favourable outcomes despite irreducible uncertainties (AR6 WGII 
Chapter  17 Cross-Chapter Box DEEP; also Marchau et al. (2019); 
Doukas and Nikas (2020)).
Literature trying to quantify the cost of climate damages has continued 
to develop. Different methodologies systematically affect outcomes, 
with recent estimates based on empirical approaches – econometric 
measurements based on actual impacts – ‘categorically higher than 
estimates from other approaches’ (AR6 WGII, Cross-Working Group 
Box ECONOMIC in Chapter  16, and Section  16.6.2). This, along 
with other developments strengthen foundations for calculating 
a ‘social cost of carbon’. This informs a common metric for comparing 
different risks and estimating benefits compared to the costs of GHG 
reductions and other risk-reducing options (Section 1.7.1); emissions 
mitigation itself also involves multiple uncertainties, which alongside 
risks can also involve potential opportunities (Section 1.7.3).
Simultaneously, the literature increasingly emphasises the 
importance of multi-objective risk assessment and management 
(e.g., representative key risks in AR6 WGII Chapter 16), which may 
or may not correlate with any single estimate of economic value 
(AR6 WGII, Section  1.4.1; IPCC risk guidance). Given the deep 
uncertainties and risks, the goals established (notably in the Paris 
Agreement and SDGs) reflect negotiated outcomes informed by the 
scientific assessment of risks.
Trends and Key Developments
Since AR5, there have been notable multilateral efforts which help 
determine the context for current and future climate action. This 
section summarises key features of this evolving context.
1.3.1 The 2015 Agreements
In 2015 the world concluded four major agreements that are very 
relevant to climate action. These include: the Paris Agreement under 
the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), the UN agreements on Disaster Risk Reduction (Sendai) 
and Finance for Development (Addis Ababa), and the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).
The Paris Agreement (PA). The Paris Agreement aims to ‘hold the 
increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above 
pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature 
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels’ (UNFCCC 2015), 
alongside goals for adaptation (IPCC AR6 WGII), and ‘aligning 
financial flows’ (see ‘finance goal’, below) , so as ‘to strengthen the 
global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of 
sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty.’
The Paris Agreement is predicated on encouraging progressively 
ambitious climate action from all countries on the basis of Nationally 
Determined Contributions (Clémençon 2016; Rajamani 2016). The 
NDC approach requires countries to set their own level of ambitions 
for climate change mitigation but within a collaborative and legally 
binding process to foster ambition towards the agreed goals (Bodansky 
2016; Falkner 2016a). The PA entered into force in November 2016 
and as of February 2021 it already had 190 Parties (out of 197 Parties 
to the UNFCCC).
The PA also underlines ‘the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different 
national circumstances’ (PA Art. 2, para. 2), and correspondingly 
that ‘developed country Parties should continue taking the lead by 
undertaking economy-wide absolute emission reductions’. It states 
that developing country Parties should continue enhancing their 
mitigation efforts, and are encouraged to move over time towards 
economy-wide emission reduction or limitation targets in the light of 
different national circumstances.
In order to achieve the its long term temperature goal, the Paris 
Agreement aims ‘to achieve a  balance between anthropogenic 
emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in 
the second half of this century’ (PA Art. 4 para. 1). The PA provides for 
five-yearly stocktakes in which Parties have to take collective stock 
on progress towards achieving its purposes and its long-term goal 
in the light of equity and available best science (PA Art. 14). The first 
global stocktake is scheduled for 2023 (PA Art. 14, para. 3).
The Paris Agreement’s finance goal aims to make ‘finance flows 
consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development’ (PA Art. 2.1C). In keeping with 
the acknowledged context of global sustainable development and 
poverty eradication, and the corresponding aims of aligning finance 
and agreed differentiating principles as indicated above, ‘…the 
developed country parties are to assist developing country parties 
with financial resources’ (PA Art. 9). The Green Climate Fund (GCF), 
an operating entity of the UNFCCC Financial Mechanism to finance 
mitigation and adaptation efforts in developing countries (GCF 2020), 
was given an important role in serving the Agreement and supporting 
PA goals. The GCF gathered pledges worth USD10.3 billion, from 
developed and developing countries, regions, and one city (Paris) 
(Antimiani et al. 2017; Bowman and Minas 2019). Financing has 
since increased but remains short of the goal to mobilise USD100 
billion by 2020 (Chapter 15).
Initiatives contributing to the Paris Agreement goals include the 
Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action (NAZCA: now renamed as 
Global Climate Action) portal, launched at COP20 (December 2014) 
in Lima, Peru, to support city-based actions for mitigating climate 
change (IISD 2015) and Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate 
Action which is a  UNFCCC-backed series of events intended to 
facilitate collaboration between governments and the cities, regions, 
businesses and investors that must act on climate change.
Details of the Paris Agreement, evaluation of the Kyoto Protocol, and 
other key multilateral developments since AR5 that are relevant to 
climate mitigation including the CORSIA aviation agreement adopted 
under ICAO, the IMO shipping strategy, and the Kigali Amendment to 
the Montreal Protocol on hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), are discussed 
in Chapter 14.
SDGs. In September 2015, the UN endorsed a universal agenda – 
‘Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development’. The agenda adopted 17 non-legally-binding SDGs 
and 169 targets to support people, peace, prosperity, partnerships 
and the planet. While climate change is explicitly listed as SDG 13, 
the pursuit of the implementation of the UNFCCC is relevant for 
a number of other goals including SDG 7 (clean energy for all), SDG 

(responsible consumption and production) as well as those relating 
to life below water (SDG 14) and on land (SDG 15) (Biermann et al. 
2017). Mitigation actions could have multiple synergies and trade-
offs across the SDGs (Pradhan et al. 2017) (Chapter  17) and their 
net effects depend on the pace and magnitude of changes, the 
specific mitigation choices and the management of the transition. 
This suggests that mitigation must be pursued in the broader context 
of sustainable development as explained in Section 1.6.
Finance. The Paris Agreement’s finance goal (above) reflects 
a  broadened focus, beyond the costs of climate adaptation and 
mitigation, to recognising that a  structural shift towards low-
carbon climate-resilient development pathways requires large-scale 
investments that engage the wider financial system (Sections 15.1 
and 15.2.4). The SR1.5 report estimated that 1.5°C pathways would 
require increased investment of 0.5–1% of global GDP between now 
and 2050, which is up to 2.5% of global savings/investment over 
the period. For low- and middle-income countries, SDG-compatible 
to be around 4–5% of their GDP , and ‘infrastructure investment 
paths compatible with full decarbonisation in the second half of 
the century need not cost more than more-polluting alternatives’ 
(Rozenberg and Fay 2019).
The parallel 2015 UN Addis Ababa Conference on Finance for 
Development, and its resulting Action Agenda, aims to ‘address 
the challenge of financing …  to end poverty and hunger, and to 
achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions through 
promoting inclusive economic growth, protecting the environment, 
and promoting social inclusion.’ The Conference recognises the 
significant potential of regional cooperation and provides a forum for 
discussing the solutions to common challenges faced by developing 
countries (Section 15.6.4).
Alongside this, private and blended climate finance is increasing 
but is still short of projected requirements consistent with Paris 
Agreement goals (Section 15.3.2.1). The financing gap is particularly 
acute for adaptation projects, especially in vulnerable developing 
countries. From a  macro-regulatory perspective, there is growing 
recognition that substantial financial value may be at risk from 
changing regulation and technology in a low-carbon transition, with 
potential implications for global financial stability (Section 15.6.3). 
To date, the most significant governance development is the 
Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD) and its recommendations that investors and 
companies consider climate change risks in their strategies and 
capital allocation, so investors can make informed decisions (TCFD 
2018), welcomed by over 500 financial institutions and companies 
as signatories, albeit with patchy implementation (Sections  1.4. 

Talanoa Dialogue and Just Transition. As mandated at Paris 
COP21 and launched at COP23, the ‘Talanoa Dialogue’ (UNFCCC 
2018a) emphasised holistic approaches across multiple economic 
sectors for climate change mitigation. At COP24 also, the Just 
Transition Silesia Declaration, focusing on the need to consider 
social aspects in designing policies for climate change mitigation 
was signed by 56 heads of state (UNFCCC 2018b). This underlined 
the importance of aiming for Just Transitions in reducing emissions, 
at the same time preserving livelihoods and managing economic 
risks for countries and communities that rely heavily on emissions-
intensive technologies for domestic growth (Markkanen and Anger-
Kraavi 2019), and for maintaining ecosystem integrity through 
nature-based solutions.

et al. 2013) (AR6 WGI SPM D1.7) may in global average be of similar magnitude to warming from methane at present. Mitigation which reduces such aerosol masking 
could thereby increase global temperatures, and reducing methane emissions would offset this much more rapidly than reducing CO 2 because of its relatively short lifetime, 
with the combined effects which could counterbalance each other (AR6 WGI SPM D1.7). Methane is thus particularly important in determining whether or when 1.5˚C is 
reached for example.


analysed in Lamb et al. (2021). An earlier study found 18 developed countries that had reduced CO 2-FFI emissions over 2005–2015 (Le Quéré et al. 2019). Decomposition 
analysis of national trends in Xia et al. (2021), identified 23 industrialised countries (UNFCCC Annex I) with CO 2-FFI emissions in 2017 lower than in 2000 (Figure 1.3), 
of which 22 had increased GDP over the period. The previously rising trend of ‘outsourced/embodied emissions’ associated with goods imported into developed countries 
peaked in 2006, but detailed data on this are only available for CO 2-FFI up to 2018 (Section 2.3). See Chapter 3 for reduction rates associated with 1.5°C and 2°C.1.3.2 Global and Regional Emissions
Global GHG emissions have continued to rise since AR5, though 
the average rate of emissions growth slowed, from 2.4% (from 
2000–2010) to 1.3% for 2010–2019 (Figure  1.1). After a  period 
of exceptionally rapid growth from 2000 as charted in AR5, global 
fossil fuel- and industry-related (FFI) CO 2 emissions almost plateaued 
between 2014 and 2016 (while the global economy continued to 
expand (World Bank 2020), but increased again over 2017–19, the 
average annual growth rate for all GHGs since 2014 being around 
0.8% yr–1 (IPCC/EDGAR emissions database; see also Chapter  11, 
Figure 11.2)). Important driving factors include population and GDP 
growth, as illustrated in panels (b) and (c) of Figure 1.1 respectively. 
The pause in emissions growth reflected the interplay of strong energy 
efficiency improvements and low-carbon technology deployment, but 
these did not expand fast enough to offset the continued pressures 
for overall growth at global level (UNEP 2018a; IEA 2019a). However, 
since 2013/14, the decline in global emissions intensity (GHG/
GDP) has accelerated somewhat, and global emissions growth has 
averaged slightly slower than population growth (Figure 1.1d), which 
if sustained would imply a peak of global CO 2 (GHG) emissions per 
capita, at about 5 tCO 2 per person (7 tCO 2-eq per person) respectively.
Due to its much shorter lifetime, methane has a  disproportionate 
impact on near-term temperature, and is estimated to account for 
almost a third of the warming observed to date (AR6 WGI SPM; AR6 
WGIII Chapter 2, Figure 2.4). Methane reductions could be particularly 
important in relation to near- and medium-term temperatures, 
including through counteracting the impact of reducing short-lived 
aerosol pollutants which have an average cooling effect.2
The land-use component of CO 2 emissions has different drivers and 
particularly large uncertainties (Figures 2.2 and 2.5), hence is shown 
separately. Also, compared to AR5, new evidence showed that the 
AFOLU CO 2 estimates by the global models assessed in this report 
are not necessarily comparable with national GHG inventories, 
due to different approaches to estimate the ‘anthropogenic’ 
CO2 sink. Possible ways to reconcile these discrepancies are 
discussed in Chapter 7.
Regional trends have varied. Emissions from most countries continued 
to grow, but in absolute terms, 32 countries reduced energy and 
industry CO 2 emissions for at least a decade, and 24 reduced overall 
GHG (CO 2-eq) emissions over the same period, but only half of them 
by more than 10% over the period in each case (Chapter 2).3 In total, 










2019Global population (billions)(b) Trends in global population










2019Global Gross Domestic Product 
(trillion USD2017 international PPP) (c) Trends in global gross domestic product (GDP)
010203040506070GHG emissions (GtCO 2-eq yr–1)
Year(a) Trends in global greenhouse gas emissions
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7











Year(d) Trends of emissions per capita (columns) and per unit GDP (line)2000










(tCO 2-eq USD–1)F-gas CO 2-FFI
N2OCH4
CO2-LULUCF
Figure 1.1 | Global emission trends since 2000 by groups of gases: absolute, per capita, and intensity.  Note: shows CO 2 from fossil fuel combustion and industrial 
processes (FFI); CO 2 from agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU); methane (CH 4); nitrous oxide (N 2O); fluorinated gases (F-gases). Gases reported in GtCO 2-eq 
converted based on AR6 global warming potentials with a 100-year time horizon (GWP100).
from the rest of the world grew.Figure  1.2 shows the distribution of regional emissions (a) per 
capita and (b) per GDP based on purchasing power parity (GDP ppp) 
of different country groupings in 2019. Plotted against population 
and GDP respectively, the area of each block is proportional to the 
(a) Distribution of regional emissions (territorial, 2019): 
CO 2-FFI (bottom-bar above x-axis, darker), plus non-CO 2 
GHGs (top bar, lighter), plus CO 2-LULUCF (top-most or 
below-axis (negative) bars)
–50510152025










Eastern Europe and 
West-Central Asia: 6.1%
Middle East: 5.6%Australia, Japan and New Zealand: 3.5%
Eastern Asia: 
27.2%Latin America and 
Caribbean: 10.3%
South-East Asia 
and Paciﬁc: 9.2%
Europe: 
8.8%
Southern Asia: 8.4%Africa: 8.8%tonnes CO 2-eq per capita
Cumulative population in million(b) Distribution of regional emissions (territorial, 2019): 
CO 2-FFI (bottom-bar above x-axis, darker), plus non-CO 2 
GHGs (top bar, lighter), plus CO 2-LULUCF (top-most or 
below-axis (negative) bars)kgCO 2-eq per USD GDP PPP
Cumulative GDP PPP (constant 2017 international USD) in trillion USD–0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9

12.1%Eastern Europe and 
West Central Asia: 6.1%-Australia, Japan 
and New Zealand: 
3.5%Africa: 
8.8%Middle East: 5.6%
Europe: 8.8%Latin America and 
Caribbean: 10.3%
Southern Asia: 8.4%Eastern Asia: 
27.2%South-East Asia 
and Paciﬁc: 9.2% 
(c) Distribution of regional emissions (consumption-based
footprint, 2018): CO 2-FFI onlytonnes CO 2 per capita(d) Distribution of regional emissions (consumption-based
footprint, 2018): CO 2-FFI onlykgCO 2-eq per USD GDP PPP
Cumulative GDP PPP (constant 2017 international USD) in trillion USD0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 12002468101214161820North America: 18.9%
Eastern Europe and 
West-Central Asia: 5.3%
Australia, Japan and 
New Zealand: 5.1%
Eastern Asia: 
29.1%Europe: 
14.3%Latin American and 
Caribbean: 5.4%
South-East Asia 
and Paciﬁc: 4.9%
Southern Asia: 8.2%
Africa: 3.1%365










00.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.45
North 
America: 
18.9%Eastern Europe and 
West-Central Asia: 5.3% 
Australia, Japan 
and New Zealand: 
5.1%Africa: 3.1%
Middle East: 5.6%
Europe: 14.3%Latin America and 
Caribbean: 5.4%
Southern Asia: 8.2%Eastern Asia: 
29.1%South-East Asia 
and Paciﬁc: 4.9% 
Figure 1.2 | Distribution of regional greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for 10 broad global regions according to territorial accounting (panels (a) and (b), 
GHG emissions) and consumption-based accounting (panels (c) and (d), CO 2-FFI emissions only). GHG emissions are categorised into: fossil fuel and industry 
(CO 2-FFI); land use, land-use change and forestry (CO 2-LULUCF); and other greenhouse gases (methane, nitrous oxide and F-gas – converted to 100-year global warming 
potentials). Per-capita GHGs for territorial (panel a) and CO 2-FFI emissions vs population for consumption-based accounting (panel c). Panels (b) and (d): GHG emissions 
per unit GDP ppp vs GDP ppp, weighted with purchasing power parity for territorial accounting (panel b), CO 2-FFI emissions per unit GDP ppp for consumption-based accounting 
(panel d). The area of the rectangles refers to the total emissions for each regional category, with the height capturing per-capita emissions (panels a and c) or emissions per 
unit GDP ppp (panels (b) and (d)), and the width proportional to the population of the regions and GDP ppp. Emissions from international aviation and shipping (2.4% of the total 
GHG emissions) are not included.

East Asia now forms substantially the biggest group, whilst at about 

remain about half that of North America. In contrast, a third of the 
world’s population, in Southern Asia and Africa, emit on average 
under 2  (2.5 tCO 2-eq) per person, little more than in the previous 
assessments. Particularly for these regions, there continue to be 
substantial differences in GDP , life expectancy and other measures of 
well-being (Figure 1.6).
Emissions per unit GDP are much less diverse than per capita and 
have also converged significantly. Poorer countries tend to show 
higher energy/emissions per unit GDP partly because of higher 
reliance on basic industries, and this remains the case, though in 
general their energy/GDP has declined faster.
Many developed country regions are net importers of energy-
intensive goods, and emissions are affected by the accounting of such 
‘embodied emissions’. Panels (c) and (d) show results (only available 
for CO 2-FFI, to 2018) on the basis of consumption footprints which 
include emissions embodied in traded goods. This makes modest 
changes to the relative position of different regions (for further 
discussion see Section 2.3).
While extreme poverty has fallen in more than half of the world’s 
economies in recent years, nearly one fifth of countries faced poverty 
rates above 30% in 2015 (below USD1.90 a  day), reflecting large 
income inequality (Laborde Debucquet and Martin 2017; Rozenberg 
and Fay 2019). Diffenbaugh and Burke (2019) find that global 
warming already has increased global economic inequality, even 
if between-country inequalities have decreased over recent decades. 
The distributional implications between regional groups in the Shared 
Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) diverge according to the scenario 
(Frame et al. 2019).

countries, now covering a large majority of global emissions, to reach 
net zero CO 2 or greenhouse gas emissions (Chapter 3).4 Furthermore, 
globally, net zero targets (whether CO 2 or GHG) have been adopted 
by about 823 cities and 101 regions (Chapter 8).
1.3.3 Some Other Key Trends and Developments
The COVID-19 pandemic profoundly impacted economy and human 
society, globally and within countries. As detailed in Cross-Chapter 
Box  1  in this chapter, some of its impacts will be long-lasting, 
permanent even, and there are also lessons relevant to climate change. 
The direct impact on emissions projected for rest of this decade are 
modest, but the necessity for economic recovery packages creates 
a central role for government-led investment, and may change the 
economic fundamentals involved for some years to come.
The COVID-19 aftermath consequently also changes the economic 
context for mitigation (Sections  15.2 and 15.4). Many traditional 
forms of economic analysis (expressed as general equilibrium) 
assume that available economic resources are fully employed, 
with limited scope for beneficial economic ‘multiplier effects’ of 
government-led investment. After COVID-19 however, no country is 
in this state. Very low interest rates amplify opportunities for large-
scale investments which could bring ‘economic multiplier’ benefits, 
especially if they help to build the industries and infrastructures for 
further clean growth (Hepburn et al. 2020). However, the capability 
to mobilise low-interest finance varies markedly across countries and 
large public debts – including bringing some developing countries 
close to default – undermine both the political appetite and feasibility 
of large-scale clean investments. In practice the current orientation of 
COVID-19 recovery packages is very varied, pointing to a very mixed 
picture about whether or not countries are exploiting this opportunity 
(Cross-Chapter Box 1 in this chapter).
Cross-Chapter Box 1 | The COVID-19 Crisis: Lessons, Risks and Opportunities for Mitigation
Authors: Diana Ürge-Vorsatz (Hungary), Lilia Caiado Couto (Brazil), Felix Creutzig (Germany), Dipak Dasgupta (India), Michael 
Grubb (United Kingdom), Kirsten Halsnæs (Denmark), Şiir Kılkış (Turkey), Alexandre Köberle (Brazil/United Kingdom), Silvia Kreibiehl 
(Germany), Jan Christoph Minx (Germany), Peter Newman (Australia), Chukwumerije Okereke (Nigeria/United Kingdom)
The COVID-19 pandemic triggered the deepest global economic contraction as well as CO 2 emission reductions since the Second 
World War (Le Quéré et al. 2020b), (AR6 WGI, Box  6.1) (Section  2.2.2.1). While emissions and most economies are expected to 
rebound in 2021–2022 (IEA 2021), some impacts of the pandemic (e.g., aspects of economy, finance and transport-related emission 
drivers) may last far longer. COVID-19 pushed more than 100 million people back into extreme poverty, and reversed progress towards 
some other SDGs including health, life expectancy and child literacy (UN DESA 2021). Health impacts and the consequences of deep 
economy-wide shocks may last many years even without significant future recurrence (Section 15.6.3). These changes, as well as the 
pandemic response actions, bring both important risks as well as opportunities for accelerating mitigation (Chapters 1, 5, 10 and 15).
Lessons. Important lessons can be drawn from the pandemic to climate change including the value of forward-looking risk management, 
the role of scientific assessment, preparatory action and international process and institutions (Chapter 5 and Section 1.3). There had 
been long-standing warnings of pandemic risks and precursors – with both pandemic and climate risks being identified by social 
scientists as ‘uncomfortable knowledge’ or ‘unknown knowns’, which tend to be marginalised in practical policy (Rayner 2012; 
Sarewitz 2020). This echoes long-standing climate literature on potential ‘high impact’ events, including those perceived as low 
probability (Dietz 2011; Weitzman 2011). The costs of preparatory action, mainly in those countries that had suffered from earlier 
pandemics were negligible in comparison, suggesting the importance not just of knowledge but its effective communication and 
embodiment in society (Chapter 5). Klenert et al. (2020) offer five early lessons for climate policy, concerning: the cost of delay; the bias 
in human judgement; the inequality of impacts; the need for multiple forms of international cooperation; and finally, ‘transparency in 
value judgements at the science–policy interface’.
Emissions and behavioural changes. Overall, global CO 2 FFI emissions declined by about 5.8% (5.1–6.3%) from 2019 to 2020, or 
about 2.2 (1.8–2.4) GtCO 2 in total (Section 2.2.2). Analysis from previous economic crises suggest significant rebound in emissions 
without policy-induced structural shifts (Jaeger et al. 2020) (Section 2.2.2.1 and Figure 2.5). Initial projections suggest the COVID 
aftermath may reduce emissions by 4–5% over 2025–2030 (Shan and Et.al 2020; Reilly et al. 2021), below a ‘no-pandemic’ baseline. 
The long-term impacts on behaviour, technology and associated emissions remain to be seen, but may be particularly significant in 
transport – lockdowns reduced mobility-related emissions, alongside two major growth areas: electronic communications replacing 
many work and personal travel requirements (Chapter 10 and Section 4.4.3.4); and revitalised local active transport and e-micromobility 
(Earley and Newman 2021). Temporary ‘clear skies’ may also have raised awareness of the potential environment and health 
co-benefits of reduced fossil fuel use particularly in urban areas (Section 8.7), with evidence also indicating that air pollution itself 
amplified vulnerability to COVID-19 (Gudka et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). The significant impacts on passenger aviation are projected 
to extend not just through behavioural changes, but also fleet changes from retiring older planes, and reduced new orders indicating 
expectations of reduced demand and associated GHG emissions until 2030 (Sections 5.1.2 and 10.5) (AR6 WGI Box 6.1 in Chapter 6). 
However, air cargo has recovered more rapidly (IATA 2020), possibly enhanced by online ordering.
Fiscal, growth and inequality impacts. Aspects of the global and regional economic crises from COVID-19 may prevail much 
longer than the crisis itself, potentially compromising mitigation. Most countries have undertaken unprecedented levels of short-term 
public expenditures. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects sovereign debt to GDP to have increased by 20% in advanced 
economies and 10% in emerging economies by the end of 2021 (IMF 2020). This is likely to slow economic growth, and may squeeze 
financial resources for mitigation and relevant investments for many years to come (Sections 15.2.3 and 15.6.3). COVID-19 further 
lowered interest rates which should facilitate low-carbon investment, but pandemic responses have increased sovereign debt across 
countries in all income bands (IMF 2021), and, particularly in some developing economies and regions, it has caused debt distress 
(Bulow et al. 2021), widening the gap in developing countries’ access to capital (Hourcade et al. 2021b) (Section 15.6.3). After decades 
of global progress in reducing poverty, COVID-19 has pushed hundreds of millions of people below poverty thresholds and raises the 
spectre of intersecting health and climate crises that are devastating for the most vulnerable (Section 5.1.2 and Box 5.1). Like those 
of climate change, pandemic impacts fall heavily on disadvantaged groups, exacerbate the uneven distribution of future benefits, 
amplify existing inequities, and introduce new ones. Increased poverty also hinders efforts towards sustainable low-carbon transitions 
(Section 1.6).
Impacts on profitability and investment. COVID-19-induced demand reduction in electricity disproportionally affected coal power 
plants, whilst transport reduction most affected oil (IEA 2020a). This accelerated pre-existing decline in the relative profitability of 
most fossil fuel industries (Ameli et al. 2021). Renewables were the only energy sector to increase output (IEA 2020a). Within the 
context of a wider overall reduction in energy investment this prompted a substantial relative shift towards low-carbon investment 
particularly by the private sector (IEA 2020b; Rosembloom and Markard 2020) (Sections 15.2.1, 15.3.1 and 15.6.1).
Post-pandemic recovery pathways provide an opportunity to attract finance into accelerated and transformative low-
carbon public investment (Sections 15.2 and 15.6.3). In most countries, COVID-19 has increased unemployment and/or state-
supported employment. There is a profound difference between short-term ‘bail outs’ to stem unemployment, and the orientation of 
new public investment. The public debt is mirrored by large pools of private capital. During deep crises like that of COVID-19, economic 
multipliers of stimulus packages can be high (Hepburn et al., 2020), so much so that fiscal injections can then generate multipliers 
from 1.5 to 2.5, weakening the alleged crowding-out effect of public stimulus  (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2012; Blanchard and 
Leigh 2013) (Section 15.2.3).
Recovery packages are motivated by assessments of the macroeconomic effectiveness (‘multipliers’) of public spending in ways that 
can crowd-in and revive private investment (Hepburn et al. 2020). There are clear reasons why a low-carbon response can create more 
enduring jobs, better aligned to future growth sectors: by also crowding-in and reviving private investment (e.g., from capital markets 
and institutional investors, including the growing profile of environmental, social and governance (ESG) and green bond markets 
(Section 15.6)), this can boost the effectiveness of public spending (IMF 2020). Stern and Valero (2021) argue that investment in low-
carbon innovation and its diffusion, complemented by investments in sustainable infrastructure, are key to shaping environmentally 
sustainable and inclusive growth in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic crisis. This would be the case both for high-income 
economies on the global innovation frontier, and to promote sustainable development in poorer economies.
A study with a global general equilibrium model (Liu et al. 2021) finds that because the COVID-19 economic aftermath combines 
negative impacts on employment and consumption, a shift from employment and consumption taxes to carbon- or other resource-
related taxes would enhance GDP by 1.7% in 2021 relative to ‘no policy’, in addition to reducing CO 2 and other pollutants. A post-
Keynesian model of wider ‘green recovery’ policies (Pollitt et al. 2021) finds a short-run benefit of around 3.5% GDP (compared to 
‘no policy’), and even about 1% above a recovery boosted by cuts in consumption taxes, the latter benefit sustained through 2030 – 
outperforming an equivalent conventional stimulus package while reducing global CO 2 emissions by 12%.
Orientation of recovery packages. The large public spending on supporting or stimulating economies, exceeding USD12 trillion 
by October 2020, dwarfs clean-energy investment needs and hence could either help to solve the combined crises, or result in high-
carbon lock-in (Andrijevic et al. 2020). The short-term ‘bail outs’ to date do not foster climate-resilient long-term investments and have 
not been much linked to climate action, (Sections 15.2.3 and 15.6.3): in the G20 counties, 40% of energy-related support spending 
went to the fossil fuel industry compared to 37% on low-carbon energy (EPT 2020). Recovery packages are also at risk of being 
‘colourless’ (Hepburn et al., 2020), though some countries and regions have prioritised green stimulus expenditures for example as 
part of a ‘Green New Deal’ (Rochedo et al. 2021) (Sections 13.9.6 and 15.6.3).
Integrating analyses. The response to COVID-19 also reflects the relevance of combining multiple analytic frameworks spanning 
economic efficiency, ethics and equity, transformation dynamics, and psychological and political analyses (Section 1.7). As with climate 
impacts, not only has the global burden of disease been distributed unevenly, but capabilities to prevent and treat disease were 
asymmetrical and those in greatest vulnerability often had the least access to human, physical, and financial resources (Ruger and 
Horton 2020). ‘Green’ versus ‘brown’ recovery has corresponding distributional consequences between these and ‘green’ producers, 
suggesting need for differentiated policies with international coordination (Le Billon et al. 2021). This illustrates the role of Just 
Transition approaches to global responses including the value of integrated, multi-level governance (Sections 1.7, 4.5 and 17.1).
Crises and opportunities: the wider context for mitigation and transformation. The impacts of COVID-19 have been 
devastating in many ways, in many countries, and may distract political and financial capacity away from efforts to mitigate climate 
change. Yet, studies of previous post-shock periods suggest that waves of innovation that are ready to emerge can be accelerated 
by crises, which may prompt new behaviours, weaken incumbent (‘meso-level’) systems, and prompt rapid reforms (Roberts and 
Geels 2019a) (Section 1.6.5). Lessons from the collective effort to ‘flatten the curve’ during the pandemic, illustrating aspects of 
science–society interactions for public health in many countries, may carry over to climate mitigation, and open new opportunities 
(Section 5.1.2). COVID-19 appears to have accelerated the emergence of renewable power, electromobility and digitalisation (Newman 
2020) (Sections 5.1.2, 6.3 and 10.2). Institutional change is often very slow but major economic dislocation can create significant 
opportunities for new ways of financing and enabling ‘leapfrogging’ investment to happen (Section 10.8). Given the unambiguous 
risks of climate change, and consequent stranded asset risks from new fossil fuel investments (Box 6.11), the most robust recoveries 
are likely to be those which emerge on lower carbon and resilient pathways (Obergassel et al. 2021). Noting the critical global post-
COVID-19 challenge as the double impact of heightened credit risk in developing countries, along with indebtedness in developed 
countries, Hourcade et al. (2021a) estimate that a ‘multilateral’ sovereign guarantee structure to underwrite low-carbon investments 
could leverage projects up to 15 times its value, contributing to shifting development pathways consistent with the SDGs and Paris goals.
COVID- 19 can thus be taken as a reminder of the urgency of addressing climate change, a warning of the risk of future stranded assets 
(Rempel and Gupta 2021) (Chapter 17), but also an opportunity for a cleaner recovery.
international agreements in 2015, and the recent impact of 
COVID-19, a few other key developments have strong implications 
for climate mitigation.
Cheaper renewable energy technologies. Most striking, the cost 
of solar photovoltaic (PV) has fallen by a  factor of 5  to 10 in the 
decade since the IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy (IPCC 
2011a) and other data inputting to the AR5 assessments. The SR1.5 
reported major cost reductions, the IEA (2020) World Energy Outlook 
described PV as now ‘the cheapest electricity in history’ for projects 
that ‘tap low cost finance and high quality resources.’ Costs and 
deployment both vary widely between different countries (Chapters 6, 

et al. 2020). Rapid technological developments have occurred in 
many other low-carbon technologies including batteries and electric 
vehicles (Section 1.4.3), IT and related control systems, with progress 
also where electrification is not possible (Chapters 2, 6 and 11).
Civil society pressures for stronger action. Civic engagement 
increased leading up to the Paris Agreement (Bäckstrand and 
Lövbrand 2019) and after. Youth movements in several countries 
show young people’s awareness about climate change, evidenced 
by the school strikes for the climate (Hagedorn et al. 2019; Buettner 
2020; Thackeray et al. 2020; Walker 2020). Senior figures across many 
religions (Francis 2015; IFEES 2015) stressed the duty of humanity 
to protect future generations and the natural world, and warned 
about the inequities of climate change. Growing awareness of local 
environmental problems such as air pollution in Asia and Africa 
(Karlsson et al. 2020), and the threat to indigenous people’s rights 
and existence has also fuelled climate activism (Etchart 2017). Grass-
roots movements (Cheon and Urpelainen 2018; Fisher et al. 2019), 
build political pressure for accelerating climate change mitigation, 
as does increasing climate litigation (Setzer and Vanhala 2019) 
(Chapters 13 and 14).
Climate policies also encounter resistance. However, there 
are multiple sources of resistance to climate action in practice. 
Corporations and trade associations often lobby against measures 
they deem detrimental (Section 1.4.6). The emblematic ‘yellow vest’ 
movement in France was triggered by higher fuel costs as a result of 
a CO 2 tax hike (Lianos 2019; Driscoll 2021), though it had broader 
aspect of income inequality and other social issues. There is often 
a  mismatch between concerns on climate change and people’s 
willingness to pay for mitigation. For example, whilst most Americans 
believe climate change is happening, 68% said in a  survey they 
would oppose climate policies that added just USD10 per month 
to electricity bills (EPIC et al. 2019), and worry about energy costs 
can eclipse those about climate change elsewhere (Poortinga et al. 
2018) (Chapter 13).
Global trends contrary to multilateral cooperation. State-
centred politics and geopolitical/geo-economic tensions seem to 
have become more prominent across many countries and issues (WEF 
2019). In some cases, multilateral cooperation could be threatened 
by trends such as rising populism, nationalism, authoritarianism 
and growing protectionism (Abrahamsen et al. 2019), making it more difficult to tackle global challenges including protecting the 
environment (Schreurs 2016; Parker et al. 2017; WEF 2019).
Transnational alliances. Partly countering this trend, cities, 
businesses and a  wide range of other non-state actors also have 
emerged with important international networks to foster mitigation. 
City-based examples include the Cities Alliance in addressing climate 
change, Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance and the Covenant of Mayors 
(Chapter 8); there are numerous other alliances and networks such as 
those in finance (Chapter 15) and technology (Chapter 16), amongst 
many others (Chapters 13 and 14).
Finally, under the Paris Agreement process, during 2020/21, many 
countries strengthened their Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs). Including updates until October 2021, these would imply 
global GHG emissions declining by 2030 to between 1–4% below 

on international support) (Table  4.3). This is a  significant change 
but would still not be compatible with 1.5°C pathways, and even if 
delivered in full, to limit warming to 2°C (>67%), emissions would 
have to fall very rapidly after 2030 (Section 3.2.5).
Thus, developments since AR5 highlight the complexity of the 
mitigation challenge. There is no far-sighted, globally optimising 
decision-maker and indeed climate policymaking at all levels is 
subject to conflicting pressures in multiple ways. The next section 
overviews the drivers and constraints.
1.4 Drivers and Constraints of Climate 
Mitigation and System Transitions/
Transformation
This section provides a brief assessment of key factors and dynamics 
that drive, shape and/or limit climate mitigation in (i) economic 
factors: which include sectors and services, trade and leakage, 
finance and investment, and technological innovation; (ii) socio-
political issues: which include political economy, social innovation, 
and equity and fairness; and (iii) institutional factors, which 
comprise policy, legal frameworks and international cooperation.
The AR5 introduced six ‘enabling conditions’ for shifting development 
pathways which are presented in Chapter 4 of this report and some 
of which overlap with the drivers reviewed here. However, the 
terminology of drivers and constraints have been chosen here to 
reflect the fact that each of these factors can serve as an enabling 
condition or a constraint to ambitious climate action depending on 
the context and how they are deployed. Often one sees the factors 
exerting both push and pull forces at the same time in the same 
and across different scales. For example, finance and investments can 
serve as a barrier or an enabler to climate action (Battiston et al. 2021). 
Similarly, political economy factors can align in favour of ambitious 
climate action or act in ways that inhibit strong cooperation and 
low-carbon transition. The other key insight from the assessment of 
the  system drivers and constraints undertaken below is that none 
of the factors or conditions by themselves is more or less important 
than the others. In addition to being deeply intertwined all the factors 
depending on the prevailing social, economic, cultural and political 
context. Often achieving accelerated mitigation would require effort 
to bring several of the factors in alignment in and across multiple 
levels of political or governance scales.
1.4.1 Services, Sectors and Urbanisation
Human activities drive emissions primarily through the demand 
for a wide range of services such as food, shelter, heating/cooling, 
goods, travel, communication, and entertainment. This demand 
is fulfilled by various activities often grouped into sectors such as 
agriculture, industry and commerce. The literature uses a wide range 
of sectoral definitions to organise data and analysis (Chapter  2). 
Energy sectors are typically organised into primary energy producers, 
energy transformation processes (such as power generation and fuel 
refining), and major energy users such as buildings, industry and 
transport (Chapters 2 and 5). Other research (Chapter 8) organises 
data around interacting urban and rural human activities. Land-
based activities can be organised into agriculture, forestry and 
other land-use (AFOLU), or land use, land-use change and forestry 
(LULUCF) (Chapter 7). Each set of sectoral definitions and analysis 
offers its own insights.
Sectoral perspectives help to identify and understand the drivers of 
emissions, opportunities for emissions mitigation, and interactions 
with resources, other goals and other sectors, including the 
co-evolution of systems across scales (Kyle et al. 2016; Moss et al. 
2016; Mori et al. 2017; IPBES 2019). Interactions between sectors 
and agents pursuing multiple goals is a  major theme pervading 
this assessment.
The ‘nexus’ between energy, water, and land – all key contributors 
to human well-being – also helps to provide, regulate and support 
ecosystem and cultural services (Bazilian et al. 2011; Ringler et al. 
2013; Smajgl et al. 2016; Albrecht et al. 2018; Brouwer et al. 2018; 
D’Odorico et al. 2018; Van Vuuren et al. 2019), with important 
implications for cities in managing new systems of transformation 
(Thornbush et al. 2013; Wolfram et al. 2016) (Chapter  8).  Other 
important nexuses shaping our planet’s future (Fajardy et al. 2018) 
include agriculture, forestry, land use and ecosystem services 
(Chazdon 2008; Settele et al. 2016; Torralba et al. 2016; Nesshöver 
et al. 2017; Keesstra et al. 2018).
Historically, energy-related GHG emissions were considered 
a  by-product of the increasing scale of human activity, driven by 
population size, economic activity and technology. That simple notion 
has evolved greatly over time to become much more complex and 
diverse, with increasing focus on the provision of energy services 
(Cullen and Allwood 2010; Bardi et al. 2019; Brockway et al. 2019; 
Garrett et al. 2020). The demand for agricultural products has 
historically driven conversion of natural lands (land-use change). 
AFOLU along with food processing accounts for 21–37% of total net 
anthropogenic GHG emissions (SRCCL SPM A3).5

continue driving up demand for goods and services (Chapters  2, 

at an unprecedented speed and scale. In the last decade, the urban 
population grew by 70 million people each year, or about 1.3 million 
people per week, with urban area expanding by about 102 km2 per 
day (Chapter  8). Urban areas account for most (45–87%) of the 
global carbon footprint (8.1) and the strong and positive correlation 
between urbanisation and incomes means higher consumption 
from urban lifestyles will continue driving direct and indirect GHG 
emissions. Cities provide a conduit to many of the services such as 
transportation, housing, water, food, medical care and recreation, 
and other services and urban carbon emissions are driven not only 
by population and income but also by the form and structure of 
urban areas (Sections  8.1 and 8.3–8.6). This creates opportunities 
for decarbonisation through urban planning and purposeful 
‘experimentation’ (Newman et al. 2017) (Chapter 8).
Human needs and wants evolve over time making the transition 
toward climate and sustainable development goals either more 
or less difficult. For example, changes in the composition of goods 
consumed, such as shifting diets toward a more vegetarian balance, 
can reduce land-use emissions without compromising the quality of 
life (Stehfest et al. 2009; Gough 2017; van Vuuren et al. 2018; van den 
Berg et al. 2019; Hargreaves et al. 2021; SRCCL SPM B2.3).
Human behaviour and choices, including joint achievement of wider 
social goals, will play an important part in enabling or hindering 
climate mitigation and sustainable development (Shi et al. 2016), 
for example, shifting passenger transportation preferences in ways 
that combine climate, health and sustainable development goals 
(Romanello et al. 2021).
1.4.2 Trade, Consumption and Leakage
Emissions associated with international trade account for 20–33 % of 
global emissions, as calculated using multi-regional input-output 
analysis (Wiedmann and Lenzen 2018). Whether international trade 
drives an increase or decrease in global GHG emissions depends on 
the emissions intensity of traded products as well as the influence 
of trade on relocation of production, with studies reaching diverse 
conclusions about the net effect of trade openness on CO 2 emissions 
(Section  2.4.5). Tariff reduction of low-carbon technologies could 
facilitate effective mitigation (de Melo and Vijil 2014; Ertugrul et al. 
2016; Islam et al. 2016; WTO 2016).
The magnitude of carbon leakage (see Glossary) caused by unilateral 
mitigation in a fragmented climate policy world depends on trade 
and substitution patterns of fossil fuels and the design of policies 
(IPCC 2014a, Box 5.4), but its potential significance in trade-exposed 
energy-intensive sectors (Bauer et al. 2013; Carbone and Rivers 2017; 
Naegele and Zaklan 2019) can make it an important constraint on 
policy. See Section 13.6.6.1 in Chapter 13 for channels and evidence. 
Akimoto et al. (2018) argue that differences in marginal abatement 
exposed sectors, and could weaken effective global mitigation.
Policy responses to cope with carbon leakage include border carbon 
adjustment (BCAs) and differentiated carbon taxes (Liu et al. 
2020). Some BCA options focusing on levelling the cost of carbon 
paid by consumers on products could be designed in line with the 
WTO (Ismer et al. 2016), while others may not be (Mehling et al. 
2019). All proposals could involve difficulty of tracing and verifying 
the carbon content of inputs (Onder 2012; Denis-Ryan et al. 2016). 
An international consensus and certification practice on the carbon 
content would help to overcome WTO compatibility (Holzer 2014). 
See Chapter 13 and Mehling et al. (2019) on the context of trade 
law and the PA.
Official inventories report territorial emissions, which do not 
consider the impacts embodied in imports of goods. Global supply 
chains undoubtedly lead to a  growth in trade volumes (Federico 
and Tena-Junguito 2017), alternative methods have been suggested 
to account for emissions associated with international trade, such 
as shared responsibility (Lenzen et al. 2007), technology-adjusted 
consumption-based accounting (Kander et al. 2015), value-
added-based responsibility (Piñero et al. 2019) and exergy-based 
responsibility based on thermodynamics (Khajehpour et al. 2019). 
Consumption-based emissions (i.e., attribution of emissions related 
to domestic consumption and imports to final destination) are not 
officially reported in global emissions datasets but data has improved 
(Tukker and Dietzenbacher 2013; Afionis et al. 2017). This analysis 
has been used extensively for consumption-based accounting of 
emissions, and other environmental impacts (Wiedmann and Lenzen 
2018; Malik et al. 2019) (Section 2.3).
Increasing international trade has resulted in a general shifting of 
fossil fuel-driven emissions-intensive production from developed 
to developing countries (Arto and Dietzenbacher 2014; Malik and 
Lan 2016), and between developing countries (Zhang et al. 2019). 
High-income developed countries thus tend to be net importers of 
emissions, whereas low/middle-income developing countries net 
exporters (Peters et al. 2011) (Figure 1.2c, d). This trend is shifting, 
with a  growth in trade between non-OECD countries (Meng et al. 
2018; Zhang et al. 2019), and a  decline in emissions intensity of 
traded goods (Wood et al. 2020b).
The Paris Agreement primarily deals with national commitments 
relating to domestic emissions and removals, hence emissions 
from international aviation and shipping are not covered. Aviation 
and shipping accounted for approximately 2.7% of greenhouse 
gas emissions in 2019 (before COVID-19); see Section  10.5.2 for 
discussion. In addition to CO 2 emissions, aircraft-produced contrail 
cirrus clouds, and emissions of black carbon and short-lived aerosols 
(e.g., sulphates) from shipping are especially harmful for the Arctic 
(Section 10.8 and Box 10.6).1.4.3 Technology
The rapid developments in technology over the past decade enhance 
potential for transformative changes, in particular to help deliver 
climate goals simultaneously with other SDGs.
The fall in renewable energy costs alongside rapid growth in capacity 
(Figure  1.3; see also Figures  6.8 and 6.11 in Chapter  6) has been 
accompanied by varied progress in many other technology areas 
such as electric vehicles, fuel cells for both stationary and mobile 
applications (Dodds 2019), thermal energy (Chapter 6), and battery 
and other storage technologies (Freeman et al. 2017) (Chapters 6, 

new generations of reactors (e.g., Generation III) and small modular 
reactors (Knapp and Pevec 2018) (Chapter 6).
Large-scale hydrogen developments could provide a complementary 
energy channel with long-term storage. Like electricity, hydrogen 
(H2) is an energy vector with multiple potential applications, 
including in industrial processes such as steel and non-metallic 
materials production (Chapter  11), for long-range transportation 
(Chapter 10), and low-temperature heating in buildings (Chapter 9). 
Emissions depend on how it is produced, and deploying H 2 delivery 
infrastructure economically is a challenge when the future scale of 
hydrogen demand is so uncertain (Chapter 6). H 2 from natural gas 
with CO 2 capture and storage (CCS) may help to kick-start the H 2 
economy (Sunny et al. 2020).
CO2-based fuels and feedstocks such as synthetic methane, methanol, 
diesel, jet fuel and other hydrocarbons, potentially from carbon 
capture and utilisation (CCU), represent drop-in solutions with limited 
new infrastructure needs (Artz et al. 2018; Bobeck et al. 2019; Yugo 
and Soler 2019) (Chapter 10). Deployment and development of CCS 
technologies (with large-scale storage of captured CO 2) have been 
much slower than projected in previous assessments (IEA 2019b; 
Page et al. 2019) (Chapter 11).
Potential constraints on new energy technologies may include their 
material requirements, notably rare earth materials for electronics 
or lithium for batteries (Wanger 2011; Flexer et al. 2018), stressing 
the importance of recycling (IPCC 2011b; Rosendahl and Rubiano 
2019). Innovation is enabling greater recycling and reuse of energy-
intensive materials (Shemi et al. 2018), and introducing radically new 
and more environmentally friendly materials, however, still not all 
materials can be recycled (Allwood 2014).
By sequestering carbon in biomass and soils, soil carbon 
management, and other terrestrial strategies could offset hard-to-
reduce emissions in other sectors. However, large-scale bioenergy 
deployment could increase risks of desertification, land degradation, 
and food insecurity (IPCC 2019a), and higher water withdrawals 
(Hasegawa et al. 2018; Fuhrman et al. 2020), though this may be 
at least partially offset by innovation in agriculture, diet shifts and 
plant-based proteins contributing to meeting demand for food, feed, 
fibre and bioenergy (or bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 
(BECCS) with CCS) (Havlik et al. 2014; Popp et al. 2017; Köberle et al. 
2020) (Chapters 5 and 7).
A broad class of more speculative technologies propose to counteract 
effects of climate change by removing CO 2 from the atmosphere 
(CDR), or by directly modifying the Earth’s energy balance at a large 
scale (solar radiation modification or SRM). CDR technologies 
include ocean iron fertilisation, enhanced weathering and ocean 
alkalinisation (Council 2015a), along with direct air carbon capture 
and storage (DACCS). They could potentially draw down atmospheric 
CO2 much faster than the Earth’s natural carbon cycle, and reduce 
reliance on biomass-based removal (Köberle 2019; Realmonte et al. 
2019), but some present novel risks to the environment and DACCS 
is currently more expensive than most other forms of mitigation (Fuss 
et al. 2018) (Cross-Chapter Box  8  in Chapter  12). Solar radiation 
modification (SRM) could potentially cool the planet rapidly at low 
estimated direct costs by reflecting incoming sunlight (Council 2015b), 
but entails uncertain side effects and thorny international equity and 
governance challenges (Netra et al. 2018; Florin et al. 2020; National 
Academies of Sciences 2021) (Chapter 14). Understanding the climate 
response to SRM remains subject to large uncertainties (AR6 WGI). 
Some literature uses the term ‘geoengineering’ for both CDR or SRM 
when applied at a planetary scale (Shepherd 2009; GESAMP 2019). 
In this report, CDR and SRM are discussed separately, reflecting their 
very different geophysical characteristics.
Large improvements in information storage, processing, and 
communication technologies, including artificial intelligence, will 
affect emissions. They can enhance energy-efficient control, reduce 
transaction costs for energy production and distribution, improve 
demand-side management (DSM) (Raza and Khosravi 2015), 
and reduce the need for physical transport (Smidfelt Rosqvist and 
Winslott Hiselius 2016) (Chapters  5, 6  and 9–11). However, data 
centres and related IT systems (including blockchain), are electricity-intensive and will raise demand for energy (Avgerinou et al. 2017) – 
cryptocurrencies may be a major global source of CO 2 if the electricity 
production is not decarbonised (Mora et al. 2018)  – and there is 
also a  concern that Information technologies can compound and 
exacerbate current inequalities (Chapters  5, 16 and Cross-Chapter 
Box 11 in Chapter 16). IT may affect broader patterns of work and 
leisure (Boppart and Krusell 2020), and the emissions intensity of 
how people spend their leisure time will become more important 
(Chapters  5 and 9). Because higher efficiency tends to reduces 
costs, it often involves some ‘rebound’ offsetting at least some of 
the emission savings (Sudbury and Hutchinson 2016; Belkhir and 
Elmeligi 2018; Cohen and Cavoli 2019).
Technology can enable both emissions reductions and/or increased 
emissions (Chapter 16). Governments play an important role in most 
major innovations, in both ‘technology-push’ (Mazzucato 2013) and 
induced by ‘demand-pull’ (Grubb et al. 2021a), so policy is important 
in determining its pace, direction and utilisation (Roberts and Geels 
2019a) (Sections 1.7.1 and 1.7.3). Overall, the challenge will be to 
enhance the synergies and minimise the trade-offs and rebounds, 
including taking account of ethical and distributional dimensions 
(Gonella et al. 2019).
1.4.4 Finance and Investment
Finance is both an enabler and a constraint on mitigation, and since 
AR5, attention to the financial sector’s role in mitigation has grown. 
This is partly in the context of the Paris Agreement finance articles and 
the Green Climate Fund, the pledge to mobilise USD100 billion yr–1  
by 2020, and the Addis Abbaba Action Agenda (Section  1.3.1). Fossil fuel cost range
Solar PV capacity
Solar PV LCOE








Electricity generation (GW)LCOE (USD2019 MWh–1)Wind energy
Fossil fuel cost range
Offshore wind installed capacityOffshore wind LCOE
Onshore wind LCOE
Auctioned offshore
wind priceOnshore wind installed capacity

 2010
 2011
 2012
 2013
 2014
 2015
 2016
 2017
 2018
 2019
Electricity generation (GW)LCOE (USD2019 MWh–1)Solar photovoltaic
Figure 1.3 | Cost reductions and adoption in solar photovoltaic and wind energy.  Fossil fuel Levelised Cost of Electricity (LCOE) is indicated by blue shading at 
USD50–177 MWh–1 (IRENA 2020b). Source: data from IRENA (2021a,b).
finance (Cui and Huang 2018) (Table 15.15.1), even though tracked 
climate finance overwhelmingly goes toward mitigation compared 
to adaptation (UNEP 2020) (Section 15.3; Working Group II). Green 
bond issuance has increased recently in parallel with efforts to reform 
the international financial system by supporting development of local 
capital markets (Section 15.6.4).
Climate finance is a multi-actor, multi-objective domain that includes 
central banks, commercial banks, asset managers, underwriters, 
development banks, and corporate planners. Climate change 
presents both risks and opportunities for the financial sector. The 
risks include physical risks related to the impacts of climate change 
itself; transition risks related to the exposure to policy, technology 
and behavioural changes in line with a low-carbon transition; and 
liability risks from litigation for climate-related damages (Box 15.2). 
These could potentially lead to stranded assets (the loss of economic 
value of existing assets before the end of their useful lifetimes (Bos 
and Gupta 2019) (Sections 6.7 and 15.6.3). Such risks continue to 
be underestimated by financial institutions (Section  15.6.1). The 
continuing expansion of fossil fuel infrastructure and insufficient 
transparency on how these are valued raises concerns that systemic 
risk may be accumulating in the financial sector in relation to 
a  potential low-carbon transition that may already be under way 
(Battiston et al. 2017) (Section  15.6.3). The Financial Stability 
Board’s Taskforce on Climate-related Financial Disclosures’ (TCFD) 
recommendations on  transparency aim to ensure that investors 
and companies consider climate change risks in their strategies and 
capital allocation (TCFD 2018). This is helping ‘investors to reassess 
core assumptions’ and may lead to ‘significant’ capital reallocation 
(Fink 2020). However, metrics and indicators of assets risk exposure 
are inadequate (Monasterolo 2017; Campiglio et al. 2018) and 
transparency alone is insufficient to drive the required asset 
reallocation in the absence of clear regulatory frameworks (Ameli 
et al. 2020; Chenet et al. 2021). A  coalition of central banks have 
formed the Network for Greening the Financial Sector, to support 
and advance the transformation of the financial system (Allen et al. 
2020; NGFS 2020), with some of them conducting climate-related 
institutional stress tests.
Governments cannot single-handedly fund the transition 
(Section  15.6.7), least of all in low-income developing countries 
with large sovereign debt and poor access to global financial 
markets. Long-term sources of private capital are required to close 
the financing gap across sectors and geographies (Section 15.6.7). 
Future investment needs are greatest in emerging and developing 
economies (Section 15.5.2) which already face higher costs of capital, 
hindering capacity to finance a  transition (Buhr et al. 2018; Ameli 
et al. 2020). Requisite North–South financial flows are impeded by 
both geographic and technological risk premiums (Iyer et al. 2015), 
and the COVID-19 pandemic has further compromised the ability 
of developing and emerging economies to finance development 
activities or attract additional climate finance from developed 
countries (Section 15.6.3, and Cross-Chapter Box 1 in this chapter). 
Climate-related investments in developing countries also suffer from 
structural barriers such as sovereign risk and exchange rate volatility 
(Farooquee and Shrimali 2016; Guzman et al. 2018) which affect not only climate-related investment but investment in general (Yamahaki 
et al. 2020) including in needed infrastructure development (Gray and 
Irwin 2003). A Green Climate Fund (GCF) report notes the paradox 
that USD14 trillion of negative-yielding debt in OECD countries might 
be expected to flow to much larger low-carbon, climate-resilient 
investment opportunities in developing countries, but ‘this is not 
happening’ (Hourcade et al. 2021b).
There is often a  disconnect between stated national climate 
ambition and finance flows, and overseas direct investment (ODI) 
from donor countries may be at odds with national climate pledges 
such as NDCs. One report found funds supported by foreign state-
owned enterprises into 56 recipient countries in Asia and Africa in 
2014–2017 went mostly to fossil fuel-based projects not strongly 
aligned with low-carbon priorities of recipient countries’ NDCs (Zhou 
et al. 2018). Similarly, Steffen and Schmidt (2019) found that even 
within multilateral development banks, ‘public- and private-sector 
branches differ considerably’, with public-sector lending used mainly 
in non-renewable and hydropower projects. Political leadership is 
therefore essential to steer financial flows to support low-carbon 
transition (Section  15.6). Voituriez et al. (2019) identify significant 
mitigation potential if financing countries simply applied their own 
environmental standards to their overseas investments.
1.4.5 Political Economy
The politics of interest (most especially economic interest) of key 
actors at sub-national, national and global levels can be important 
determinants of climate (in)action (O’Hara 2009; Lo 2010; Tanner 
and Allouche 2011; Sovacool et al. 2015; Lohmann 2017; Clapp et al. 
2018; Newell and Taylor 2018; Lohmann 2019). Political economy 
approaches can be crudely divided into ‘economic approaches to 
politics’, and those used by other social scientists (Paterson and 
P-Laberge 2018). The former shows how electoral concerns lead 
to weak treaties (Battaglini and Harstad 2016) and when policy 
negotiations cause status-quo biases and the use of inefficient 
policy instruments (Austen-Smith et al. 2019) or delays and excessive 
harmonisation (Harstad 2007). The latter emphasises the central 
role of structures of power and production, and a  commitment to 
economic growth and capital accumulation in relation to climate 
action, given the historically central role of fossil fuels to economic 
development and the deep embedding of fossil energy in daily life 
(Newell and Paterson 2010; Huber 2012; Di Muzio 2015; Malm 2015).
The economic centrality of fossil fuels raises obvious questions 
regarding the possibility of decarbonisation. Economically, this 
is well understood as a problem of decoupling. But the constraint is 
also political, in terms of the power of incumbent fossil fuel interests 
to block initiatives towards decarbonisation (Jones and Levy 2009; 
Newell and Paterson 2010; Geels 2014). The effects of climate policy 
are key considerations in deciding the level of policy ambition and 
direction and strategies of states (Lo 2010; Alam et al. 2013; Ibikunle 
and Okereke 2014), regions (Goldthau and Sitter 2015), and business 
actors (Wittneben et al. 2012), and there is a  widespread cultural 
assumption that continued fossil fuel use is central to this (Strambo 
and Espinosa 2020). Decarbonisation strategies are often centred 
markets creating new commodities (Newell and Paterson 2010); 
investment generated in new urban infrastructure (Whitehead 2013); 
and/or innovations in a range of new energy technologies (Fankhauser 
et al. 2013; Lachapelle et al. 2017; Meckling and Nahm 2018).
One factor limiting the ambition of climate policy has been the ability 
of incumbent industries to shape government action on climate 
change (Newell and Paterson 1998; Jones and Levy 2009; Geels 2014; 
Breetz et al. 2018). Incumbent industries are often more concentrated 
than those benefiting from climate policy and lobby more effectively 
to prevent losses than those who would gain (Meng and Rode 2019). 
Drawing upon wider networks (Brulle 2014), campaigns by oil and 
coal companies against climate action in the United States of America 
and Australia are perhaps the most well known and largely successful 
of these (Pearse 2017; Brulle et al. 2020; Mildenberger 2020; Stokes 
2020), although similar dynamics have been demonstrated in Brazil 
and South Africa (Hochstetler 2020), Canada (Harrison 2018), 
and Norway and Germany (Fitzgerald et al. 2019), for example. 
In other contexts, resistance by incumbent companies is more 
subtle but nevertheless has weakened policy design on emissions 
trading systems (Rosembloom and Markard 2020), and limited the 
development of alternative-fuelled automobiles (Levy and Egan 
2003; Wells and Nieuwenhuis 2012).
The interaction of politics, power and economics is central in explaining 
why countries with higher per-capita emissions, which logically have 
more opportunities to reduce emissions, in practice often take the 
opposite stance, and conversely, why some low-emitting countries 
may find it easier to pursue climate action because they have fewer 
vested interests in high-carbon economies. These dynamics can 
arise from the vested interest of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) 
(Wittneben et al. 2012; Polman 2015; Wright and Nyberg 2017), the 
alignment and coalitions of countries in climate negotiations (Gupta 
2016; Okereke and Coventry 2016), and the patterns of opposition 
to or support for climate policy among citizens (Baker 2015; Swilling 
et al. 2016; Heffron and McCauley 2018; Ransan-Cooper et al. 2018; 
Turhan et al. 2019).
1.4.6 Equity and Fairness
Equity and fairness can serve as both drivers and barriers to climate 
mitigation at different scales of governance. Literature regularly 
highlights equity and justice issues as critical components in local 
politics and international diplomacy regarding all SDGs, such as goals 
for no poverty, zero hunger, gender equality, affordable clean energy, 
reducing inequality, but also for climate action (SDG 13) (Marmot and 
Bell 2018; Spijkers 2018). Equity issues help explain why it has proved 
hard to reach more substantive global agreements, as it is hard to 
agree on a level of greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation (or emissions) 
and how to distribute mitigation efforts among countries (Kverndokk 
2018) for several reasons. First, an optimal trade-off between 
mitigation costs and damage costs of climate change depends on 
ethical considerations, and simulations from integrated assessment 
models using different ethical parameters producing different optimal 
mitigation paths (IPCC 2018b) (Section 3.6.1.2). Second, treaties that are considered unfair may be hard to implement (Klinsky et al. 2017; 
Liu et al. 2017). Lessons from experimental economics show that 
people may not accept a distribution that is considered unfair, even if 
there is a cost of not accepting (Gampfer 2014). As equity issues are 
important for reaching deep decarbonisation, the transition towards 
sustainable development (Evans and Phelan 2016; Heffron and 
McCauley 2018; Okereke 2018) depends on taking equity seriously 
in climate policies and international negotiations (Okereke and 
Coventry 2016; Klinsky et al. 2017; Martinez et al. 2019).
Climate change and climate policies affect countries and people 
differently. Low-income countries tend to be more dependent 
on primary industries (agriculture and fisheries, etc.) than richer 
countries, and their infrastructure may be less robust to tackle more 
severe weather conditions. Within a country, the burdens may not be 
equally distributed either, due to policy measures implemented and 
from differences in vulnerability and adaptive capacity following from 
e.g. income and wealth distribution, race and gender. For instance, 
unequal social structures can result in women being more vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change compared to men, especially in poor 
countries (Arora-Jonsson 2011; Jost et al. 2016; Rao et al. 2019). 
Costs of mitigation also differ across countries. Studies show there 
are large disparities of economic impacts of NDCs across regions, 
and also between relatively similar countries when it comes to the 
level of development, due to large differences in marginal abatement 
costs for the emission-reduction goal of NDCs (Fujimori et al. 2016; 
Hof et al. 2017; Akimoto et al. 2018; Evans &  Gabbatiss 2019). 
Equalising the burdens from climate policies may give more support 
for mitigation policies (Maestre-Andrés et al. 2019).
Taking equity into account in designing an international climate 
agreement is complicated as there is no single universally accepted 
equity criterion, and countries may strategically choose a  criterion 
that favours them (Lange et al. 2007, 2010). Still, several studies 
analyse the consequences of different social preferences in designing 
climate agreements, such as, for instance, inequality aversion, 
sovereignty and altruism (Anthoff et al. 2010; Kverndokk et al. 2014).
International transfers from rich to poor countries to support 
mitigation and adaptation activities may help with equalising 
burdens, as agreed upon in the UNFCCC (1992) (Chapters  14 and 
15), such that they may be motivated by strategic as well as equity 
reasons (Kverndokk 2018) (Section 1.4.4).
1.4.7 Social Innovation and Behaviour Change
Social and psychological factors affect both perceptions and 
behaviour (Weber 2015; Whitmarsh et al. 2021). Religion, values, 
culture, gender, identity, social status and habits strongly influence 
individual behaviours and choices, and therefore sustainable 
consumption (Sections  1.6.3.1 and 5.2). Identities can provide 
powerful attachments to consumption activities and objects that 
inhibit shifts away from them (Brekke et al. 2003; Bénabou and 
Tirole 2011; Stoll-Kleemann and Schmidt 2017; Ruby et al. 2020). 
Consumption is a  habit-driven and social practice rather than 
simply a  set of individual decisions, making shifts in consumption 
et al. 2015; Warde 2017; Verplanken and Whitmarsh 2021). Finally, 
shifts towards low-carbon behaviour are also inhibited by social-
psychological and political dynamics that cause individuals to ignore 
the connections from daily consumption practices to climate change 
impacts (Norgaard 2011; Brulle and Norgaard 2019).
As a notable example, plant-based alternatives to meat could reduce 
emissions from diets (Eshel et al. 2019; Willett et al. 2019). However, 
diets are deeply entrenched in cultures and identities, and hard to 
change (Fresco 2015; Mylan 2018). Changing diets also raises cross-
cultural ethical issues, in addition to meat’s role in providing nutrition 
(Plumwood 2004). Henceforth, some behaviours that are harder to 
change will only be transformed by the transition itself: triggered by 
policies, the transition will bring about technologies that, in turn, will 
entrench new sustainable behaviours.
Behaviour can be influenced through a number of mechanisms besides 
economic policy and regulation, such as information campaigns, 
advertising and ‘nudging’. Innovations and infrastructure also impact 
behaviour, as with bicycle lanes to reduce road traffic. Wider social 
innovations also have indirect impacts. Education is increasing 
across the world, and higher education will have impacts on fertility, 
consumption and the attitude towards the environment (Osili and 
Long 2008; Hamilton 2011; McCrary and Royer 2011). Reducing 
poverty and improvements in health and reproductive choice will also 
have implications for fertility, energy use and consumption globally. 
Finally, social capital and the ability to work collectively may have 
large consequences for mitigation and the ability to adapt to climate 
change (Adger 2009; IPCC 2014a Section 4.3.5).
1.4.8 Policy Impacts
Transformation to different systems will hinge on conscious policy to 
change the direction in which energy, land use, agriculture and other 
key sectors develop (Bataille et al. 2016) (Chapters 13 and 16). Policy 
plays a  central role in in land-related systems (Chapter  7), urban 
development (Chapter  8), improving energy efficiency in buildings 
(Chapter 9) and transport/mobility (Chapter 10), and decarbonising 
industrial systems (Chapter 11).
Policy has been and will be central not only because GHG emissions 
are almost universally under-priced in market economies (Stern and 
Stiglitz 2017; World Bank 2019), and because of inadequate economic 
incentives to innovation (Jaffe et al. 2005), but also due to various 
delay mechanisms (Karlsson and Gilek 2020) and multiple sources 
of path-dependence and lock-in to existing systems (Section 1.8.2), 
including: ‘Infrastructure developments and long-lived products 
that lock societies into GHG-intensive emissions pathways may be 
difficult or very costly to change, reinforcing the importance of early 

energy-efficient technology, the savings from which persist. As a purely illustrative example: the annual increase in global emissions during 2000–2010 averaged around 

have been, this is hard to discern. But if these savings sustain, and in each subsequent year, policies cut another 100 MtCO 2-eq off the annual increase compared to the 
previous year, global emissions after a decade would be around 5 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 below what they would have been without any such policies, and on average close to 
stabilising. However each step would be difficult to discern in the noise of annual fluctuations.action for ambitious mitigation (robust evidence, high agreement).’ 
(AR5 WGIII p.18).
Many hundreds of policies have been introduced explicitly to mitigate 
GHG emissions, improve energy efficiency or land use, or to foster 
low-carbon industries and innovation, with demonstrable impact. 
The role of policy to date has been most evident in energy efficiency 
(Sections 5.4 and 5.6) and electricity (Chapter 6). The IPCC Special 
Report on Renewable Energy already found that: ‘Government policies 
play a crucial role in accelerating the deployment of RE technologies’ 
(IPCC 2011a, p. 24). Policy packages since then have  driven rapid 
expansion in renewables capacity and cost reductions (e.g., through 
the German Energiewende), and emission reductions from electricity 
(most dramatically with the halving of CO 2 emissions from the UK 
power sector, driven by multiple policy instruments and regulatory 
changes), as detailed in Chapter 6 (Section 6.7.5).
Chapter 13 charts the international evolution of policies and many 
of the lessons drawn. Attributing the overall impact on emissions 
is complex, but an emerging literature of several hundred papers 
indicates impacts on multiple drivers of emissions. Collectively, 
policies are likely to have curtailed global emissions growth by 
several GtCO 2-eq annually already by the mid-2010s (Cross-Chapter 
Box 10 in Chapter 14). This suggests initial evidence that policy has 
driven some decoupling (Figure 1.1d) and started to ‘bend the curve’ 
of global emissions, but more specific attribution to observed trends 
is not as yet possible.6
However, some policies (e.g.,  subsidies to fossil fuel production or 
consumption) increase emissions, whilst others (e.g.,  investment 
protection) may constrain efforts at mitigation. Also, wider economic 
and developmental policies have important direct and indirect 
impacts on emissions. Policy is thus both a driver and a constraint 
on mitigation.
Synergies and trade-offs arise partly because of the nexus of GHG 
emissions with other adverse impacts (e.g., local air pollution) and 
critical resources (e.g., water and food) (Conway et al. 2015; Andrews-
Speed and Dalin 2017), which also imply interacting policy domains.
The literature shows increasing emphasis on policy packages, 
including those spanning the different levels of niche/behaviour; 
existing regimes governing markets and public actors; and strategic 
and landscape levels (Section 1.7.3). Chapters 13, 16 and 17 appraise 
policies for transformation in the context of sustainable development, 
indicating the importance of policy as a  driver at multiple levels 
and across many actors, with potential for benefits as well as costs 
at many levels.
National-level legislation may be particularly important to the credibility 
and long-term stability of policy to reduce the risks, and hence cost, 
innovation at scale (Chapter 16), for example, if it offers greater stability 
and mid-term predictability for carbon prices; Nash and Steurer (2019) 
find that seven national climate change acts in European countries all 
act as ‘living policy processes, though to varying extents’.
The importance of policy at multiple levels does not lessen the 
importance of international policy, for reasons including long-term 
stability, equity, and scope, but examples of effective implementation 
policy at international levels remain fewer and governance weaker 
(Chapter 14).
1.4.9 Legal Framework and Institutions
Institutions are rules and norms held in common by social actors 
that guide, constrain and shape human interaction  (IPCC 2018b). 
Institutions can be formal, such as laws and policies, or informal, 
such as norms and conventions.  Institutions can both facilitate or 
constrain climate policymaking and implementation in multiple 
ways. Institutions set the economic incentives for action or inaction 
on climate change at national, regional and individual levels (Dorsch 
and Flachsland 2017; Sullivan 2017).
Institutions entrench specific political decision-making processes, 
often empowering some interests over others, including powerful 
interest groups who have vested interests in maintaining the current 
high-carbon economic structures (Okereke and Russel 2010; Wilhite 
2016; Engau et al. 2017); see also Section  1.4.6 and Chapter  13 
on the sub-national and national governance challenges including 
coordination, mediating politics and strategy setting.
Some suggest that societal transformation towards a  low-carbon future 
requires new politics that involves thinking in intergenerational time 
horizons, as well as new forms of partnerships between private and 
public actors (Westman and Broto 2018), and associated institutions 
and social innovations to increase involvement of non-state actors in 
climate governance (Fuhr et al. 2018). However literature is divided 
as to how much democratisation of climate politics, with greater 
emphasis on equity and community participation, would advance 
societal transformation in the face of climate change (Stehr 2005), 
or may actually hinder radical climate action in some circumstances 
(Povitkina 2018).
Since 2016, the number of climate litigation cases has increased 
rapidly. The UN Environment Programme’s Global Climate Litigation 
Report: 2020 Status Review (UNEP 2020) noted that between 
March 2017 and 1 July 2020, the number of cases nearly doubled with 
at least 1550 climate cases filed in eight countries. Several important 
cases such as Urgenda Foundation vs The State of the Netherlands 
(‘Urgenda’) and Juliana et al. vs United States (‘Juliana’) have had 
ripple effects, inspiring other similar cases (Lin and Kysar 2020).
Numerous international climate governance initiatives engage 
national and sub-national governments, NGOs and private 
corporations, constituting a ‘regime complex’ (Raustiala and Victor 
2004; Keohane and Victor 2011). They may have longer-run and second-order effects if commitments are more precise and binding 
(Kahler 2017). However, without targets, incentives, defined baselines 
or monitoring, reporting, and verification, they are not likely to fill the 
‘mitigation gap’ (Michaelowa and Michaelowa 2017).
1.4.10 International Cooperation
Tackling climate change is often mentioned as an important reason 
for strong international cooperation in the 21st century (Falkner 
2016; Keohane and Victor 2016; Bodansky et al. 2017; Cramton 
et al. 2017b). Mitigation costs are borne by countries taking action, 
while the benefits of reduced climate change are not limited to 
them, being in economic terms ‘global and non-excludable’. Hence 
anthropogenic climate change is typically seen as a global commons 
problem (Falkner 2016; Wapner and Elver 2017). Moreover, the belief 
that mitigation will raise energy costs and may adversely affect 
competitiveness creates incentives for free riding, where states avoid 
taking their fair share of action (Barrett 2005; Keohane and Victor 
2016). International cooperation has the potential to address these 
challenges through collective action (Tulkens 2019) and international 
institutions offer the opportunity for actors to engage in meaningful 
communication and exchange of ideas about potential solutions 
(Cole 2015). International cooperation is also vital for the creation 
and diffusion of norms and the framework for stabilising expectations 
among actors (Pettenger 2016).
Some key roles of the UNFCCC have been detailed by its former 
heads (Kinley et al. 2021). In addition to specific agreements (most 
recently the PA) it has enhanced transparency through reporting 
and data, and generated or reinforced several important norms for 
global climate action including the principles of equity, common 
but differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities, and the 
precautionary principles for maintaining global cooperation among 
states with unevenly distributed emissions sources, climate impacts, 
and varying mitigation costs across countries (Keohane and Victor, 
2016). In addition to formal negotiations, the annual Conference of 
the Parties (COPs) have increased awareness, and motivated more 
ambitious actions, sometimes through the formation of ‘coalitions 
of the willing’, for example. It provides a  structure for measuring 
and monitoring action towards a global goal (Milkoreit and Haapala 
2019). International cooperation (including the UNFCCC) can also 
promote technology development and transfer and capacity building; 
mobilise finance for mitigation and adaptation; and help address 
concerns on climate justice (Okereke and Coventry 2016; Chan et al. 
2018) (Chapters 14–16).
A common criticism of international institutions is their limited 
(if any) powers to enforce compliance (Zahar 2017). As a global legal 
institution, the PA has little enforcement mechanism (Sindico 2015), 
but enforcement is not a  necessary condition for an instrument 
to be legally binding (Bodansky 2016; Rajamani 2016). In reality 
implementation of specific commitments tends to be high once 
countries have ratified and a  treaty or an agreement is in force 
(Bodansky 2016; Rajamani 2016). Often, the problem is not so much 
of ‘power to enforce compliance or sanction non-compliance’, but 
the level of ambition (Chapter 14).
has also been characterised as ‘organised hypocrisy’ where 
proclamations are not matched with corresponding action (Egnell 
2010). Various reasons for inadequate progress after 30 years of 
climate negotiations, have been identified (Stoddard et al. 2021). 
International cooperation can also seem to be a barrier to ambitious 
action when negotiation is trapped in ‘relative-gains’ calculus, in 
which countries seek to game the regime or gain leverage over 
one another (Purdon 2017), or where states lower ambition to the 
‘least common dominator’ to accommodate participation of the least 
ambitious states (Falkner 2016). Geden (2016) and Dubash (2020) 
offer more nuanced assessments.
International collaboration works best if an agreement can be made 
self-reinforcing with incentives for mutual gains and joint action 
(Barrett 2016; Keohane and Victor 2016), but the structure of the 
climate challenge makes this hard to achieve. The evidence from the 
Montreal Protocol on ozone-depleting substances and from the Kyoto 
Protocol on GHGs, is that legally binding targets have been effective 
in that participating Parties complied with them (Shishlov et al. 2016; 
Albrecht and Parker 2019), and (for Kyoto) these account for most of 
the countries that have sustained emission reductions for at least the 
past 10 to 15 years (Sections 1.3.2 and 2.2). However, such binding 
commitments may deter participation if there are no clear incentives 
to sustain participation and especially if other growing emitters are 
omitted by design, as with the Kyoto Protocol. Consequently the USA 
refused to ratify (and Canada withdrew), particularly on the grounds 
that developing countries had no targets; with participation in Kyoto’s 
second period commitments declining further, the net result was 
limited global progress in emissions under Kyoto (Bodansky 2016; 
Okereke and Coventry 2016; Scavenius and Rayner 2018) despite full 
legal compliance in both commitment periods (Chapter 14).
The negotiation of the Paris Agreement was thus done in the context 
of serious questions about how best to structure international 
climate cooperation to achieve better results. This new agreement 
is designed to sidestep the fractious bargaining which characterised 
international climate cooperation (Marcu 2017). It contains a  mix 
of hard, soft and non-obligations, the boundaries between which 
are blurred, but each of which plays a  distinct and valuable role 
(Rajamani 2016). The provisions of the PA could encourage flexible 
responses to changing conditions, but limit assurances of ambitious 
national commitments and their fulfilment (Pickering et al. 2018). The 
extent to which this new arrangement will drive ambitious climate 
policy in the long run remains to be seen (Chapter 14).
Whilst the PA abandoned common accounting systems and time 
frames, outside of the UNFCCC many other platforms and metrics for 
comparing mitigation efforts have emerged (Aldy 2015). Countries 
may assess others’ efforts in determining their actions through multiple 
platforms including the Climate Change Cooperation Index (C3-I), 
Climate Change Performance Index (CCPI), Climate Laws, Institutions 
and Measures Index (CLIMI) (Bernauer and Böhmelt 2013) and 
Energy Transition Index (Singh et al. 2019). International cooperative 
initiatives between and among non-state (e.g.,  business, investors 
and civil society) and sub-national (e.g., city and state) actors have 
also been emerging, taking the forms of public-private partnerships, private-sector governance initiatives, NGO transnational initiatives, 
and sub-national transnational initiatives (Bulkeley and Schroeder 
2012; Hsu et al. 2018). Literature is mostly positive about the role 
of these transnational initiatives in facilitating climate action across 
scales although criticism and caution about their accountability and 
effectiveness remain (Chan et al. 2016; Michaelowa and Michaelowa 
2017; Roger et al. 2017; Widerberg and Pattberg 2017) (Chapter 14).
1.5 Emissions Scenarios and Illustrative 
Mitigation Pathways (IMPs)
Scenarios are a powerful tool for exploring an uncertain future world 
against the background of alternative choices and development. 
Scenarios can be constructed using both narrative and quantitative 
methods. When these two methods are combined they provide 
complementary information and insights. Quantitative and narrative 
models are frequently used to represent scenarios to explore choices 
and challenges. The IPCC has a long history of assessing scenarios 
(Nakicenovic et al. 2000; van Vuuren et al. 2011, 2014) (see also AR6 
WGI Section 1.6 for a history of scenarios within the IPCC). This WGIII 
assessment employs a  wide range of qualitative and quantitative 
scenarios including quantitative scenarios developed through a wide 
and heterogeneous set of tools ranging from spreadsheets to complex 
computational models (Annex III: Scenarios and Modelling Methods 
provides further discussion and examples of computational models).
The concept of an illustrative pathway (IP) was introduced in 
the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5ºC (IPCC 2018b) 
to highlight a  subset of the quantitative scenarios, drawn from 
a larger pool of published literature, with specific characteristics that 
would help represent some of the key findings emerging from the 
assessment in terms of different strategies, ambitions and options 
available to achieve the Paris goals.
Integrated assessment models (IAMs) are the primary tools for 
quantitatively evaluating the technological and macroeconomic 
implications of decarbonisation, particularly for global long-term 
pathways. They broadly divide into ‘stylised aggregate benefit-cost 
models’, and more complex ‘detailed process’ IAMs (Weyant 2017), 
often mirroring the benefit-cost and cost-effective approaches 
outlined in Section  1.7.1, with more detailed classification in, for 
example, Nikas et al. (2019). IAMs embody a number of structural 
and socio-demographic assumptions and include multiple modelling 
approaches, ranging from economic optimising behaviour to 
simulation (see Annex III). Detailed process models can include 
energy system models used to analyse decarbonisation and ‘net zero’ 
scenarios by international agencies (e.g., IEA 2020a).
Calculating cost-effective trajectories towards given goals typically 
involves detailed process IAMs. Often these calculate the dynamic 
portfolio of technologies consistent with a  given climate target. 
Some track records of technology forecasting in IAMs are outlined 
in Section  2.5.4, and Box  16.1. Climate targets may be imposed 
in models in a variety of ways that include, but are not limited to, 
constraints on emissions or cumulated emissions (carbon budgets), 
and the pricing of emissions. The time-path of mitigation costs 
prices’ that (like the social cost of carbon; SCC) offer a benchmark 
to assess the cost-effectiveness of investments, as used by some 
governments and companies (Section 1.8.2).
Scenarios in the IPCC and AR6. For AR6, WGIII received submissions 
of more than 2500 model-based scenarios published in the scientific 
literature. Such scenarios, which explore different possible evolutions 
of future energy and land use (with or without climate policy) and 
associated emissions, are made available through an interactive 
AR6 scenario database. The main characteristics of pathways in 
relation to ‘net zero’ emissions and remaining ‘carbon budgets’ 
are summarised in Box 3.5 in Chapter 3. The warming contribution 
of CO 2 is very closely related to cumulative CO 2 emissions, but the 
remaining ‘carbon budget’ for a  given warming depends strongly 
inter alia on emissions of other GHGs; for targets below 2°C this 
may affect the corresponding ‘carbon budget’ by about ±220 GtCO 2, 
compared to central estimates of around 500 GtCO 2 (for 1.5°C) and 

Box 1 in Chapter 3).
Pathways and ‘net zero’. The date at which the world needs 
aggregate emissions to reach net zero for Paris-consistent 
temperature goals depends both on progress in reducing non-CO 2 
GHG emissions and near-term progress in reducing CO 2 emissions. 
Faster progress in the near term extends the date at which net 
zero must be reached, while conversely, slower near-term progress 
brings the date even closer to the present. Some of the modelled 
1.5°C pathways with limited overshoot cut global CO 2 emissions in 
half until 2030, which allows for a more gradual decline thereafter, 
reaching net zero CO 2 after 2050; also, net zero GHGs occurs later, with remaining emissions of some non-CO 2 GHGs compensated by 
‘net negative’ CO 2 (see Glossary and FAQ 1.3, and Cross-Chapter 
Box 3 in Chapter 3).
Drawing from the scenarios database, five Illustrative Mitigation 
Pathways (IMPs) were defined for this report (Figure  3.5 and 
Table  1.1). These are introduced here, with a  more complete 
description and discussion provided in Section  3.2.5. These IMPs 
were chosen to illustrate key themes with respect to mitigation 
strategies across the entire WGIII assessment. The IMPs embody 
both a  storyline, which describes in narrative form the key socio-
economic characteristics of that scenario, and a  quantitative 
illustration providing numerical values that are internally consistent 
and comparable across chapters of this report. Quantitative IMPs 
can be associated directly with specific human activities and provide 
a quantitative point of reference that links activities in different parts 
of socio-economic systems. Some parts of the report draw on these 
quantitative scenarios, whilst others use only the narratives. No 
assessment of the likelihood of each IMP has been made (as they 
reflect both human choice and deep uncertainty).
The IMPs are organised around two dimensions: the level of 
ambition consistent with meeting Paris goals, and the scenario 
features (Figure 1.4). The IMPs explore different pathways potentially 
consistent with meeting the long-term temperature goals of the Paris 
Agreement. As detailed in Section 3.2.5 and in Chapter 4, a pathway 
of Gradual Strengthening of current policies (IMP-GS) to 2030, if 
followed by very fast reductions, may stay below 2°C. The IMP-NEG 
pathway, with somewhat deeper emission cutbacks to 2030, might 
enable 1.5°C to be reached but only after significant overshoot, 
through the subsequent extensive use of CDR in the energy and 
CurPol
ModAct
IMP-GS
IMP-LD IMP-SP
Gradual
Strengthening
(GS)Accelerated
Renewables
(REN)Low Energy
Demand
(LD)Emphasis on
Net Negative
EmissionsFocus on Shifting 
Development
PathwaysIncreasing level of ambition
Scenario featuresIMPs consistent with Paris objectivesScenarios fo r
compari son
IMP-RenIMP-Neg
Figure 1.4 | Illustrative Mitigation Pathways (IMPs) used in AR6: illustration of key features and levels of ambition.
the industry sectors to achieve net negative global emissions, as 
discussed in Chapters 3, 6, 7, 10 and 12.
Three other IMPs illustrate different features of technology scenarios 
with more short-term rapid emission reductions, which could deliver 
outcomes compatible with the temperature range in the Paris 
Agreement without large overshoot. Based on the assessment in 
Section 5.3.3, one key mitigation strategy would be to rely on the 
opportunities for reducing demand (IMP-LD). Chapters 6 and 7–11 
show how energy systems based on accelerated deep renewable 
energy penetration and electrification can also provide a pathway to 
deep mitigation (IMP-REN). Chapters 3, 4 and 17 provide insights 
into how shifting development pathways can lead to deep emission 
reductions and achieve sustainable development goals (IMP-SP).
These pathways can be implemented with different levels of ambition, 
that can be measured through the classes (C) of temperature levels 
from the scenarios database, see Chapter  3  (Table  3.2). In the 
IMP framework, Section  3.2.5 presents and explores quantitative 
scenarios that can limit warming to 1.5°C (with a probability of 50% 
or greater, i.e., C1 for the illustrated quantification of LD, SP and REN, 
and C2 for NEG scenario), along with other GS pathways which keep 
warming below 2°C with a  probability of 67% or greater (C3). In 
addition to these primary IMPs, the full scenario database contains 
sensitivity cases that explore alternative warming levels.
In addition to the IMPs two additional scenarios were selected, which 
illustrate the consequences of current policies and pledges. Current 
Policies (CurPol) explores the consequences of continuing along the 
path of implemented climate policies in 2020 and only a  Gradual 
Strengthening after that, drawing on numerous such scenarios in 
the literature. Moderate Action (ModAct) explores the impact of 
implementing NDCs to 2030, but without further strengthening: both result in global mean temperature above 2°C.  They provide 
benchmarks against which to compare the IMPs.
Table 1.1 summarises the main storyline elements of the reference 
scenarios and each IMP .
What the IMPs do and don’t do.  The IMPs are, as their name 
implies, a set of scenarios meant to illustrate some important themes 
that run through the entire WGIII assessment. They illustrate that the 
climate outcomes that individuals and society will face in the century 
ahead depend on individual and societal choices. In addition, they 
illustrate that there are multiple ways to successful achievement of 
Paris long-term temperature goals.
IMPs are not intended to be comprehensive. They are not intended 
to illustrate all possible themes in this report. They do not, for 
example, attempt to illustrate the range of alternative socio-
economic pathways against which efforts to implement Paris goals 
may be set, or to reflect variations in potential regional development 
pathways. They do not explore issues around income distribution or 
environmental justice, but assume implicitly that where and how 
action occurs can be separated from who pays, in ways to adequately 
address such issues. They are essentially pathways of technological 
evolution and demand shifts reflecting broad global trends in social 
choice. The IMPs do not directly assess issues of realisation linked to 
the ‘drivers and constraints’ summarised in our previous section, and 
the quantifications use, for the most part, models that are grounded 
mainly in the Aggregate Economics Frameworks (Section 7.1). As such 
they reflect primarily the geophysical, economic and technological 
Dimensions of Assessment, but can be assessed in relation to the full 
set of Feasibility criteria (Section 1.8.1).
Together the IMPs provide illustrations of potential future 
developments that can be shaped by human choices, including: Table 1.1 | Illustrative Mitigation Pathways used in AR6.
Scenarios Full name Main policy characteristics
CurPol Current PoliciesImplementation of current climate policies (mostly as reported in Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)), neglecting 
stated subsequent goals and objectives (e.g., for 2030); only Gradual Strengthening after 2030; grey COVID recovery.
ModAct Moderate ActionImplementation of current policies and achievement of 2030 NDCs, with further strengthening post-2030. Similarly to 
the situation implied by the diversity of NDCs (both policies and pledges), a fragmented policy landscape remains; mixed 
COVID recovery.
IMPs1.5°C/ 
<2°CGS Gradual StrengtheningUntil 2030, primarily current NDCs are implemented; after that a strong universal regime leads to coordinated and rapid 
decarbonisation actions.
NegNet 
Negative EmissionsSuccessful international climate policy regime reduces emissions below ModAct or GS to 2030, but with a focus on the long-
term temperature goal, negative emissions kick in at growing scales thereafter, so that mitigation in all sectors also includes 
a growing and ultimately large reliance on negative emissions, with large ‘net global negative’ after 2050 to meet 1.5˚C after 
significant overshoot.
Ren RenewablesSuccessful international climate policy regime with immediate action, particularly policies and incentives (including 
international finance) favouring renewable energy; less emphasis on negative-emission technologies. Rapid deployment 
and innovation of renewables and systems; electrification of all end use.
LD Low DemandSuccessful international climate policy regime with immediate action on the demand side; policies and financial incentives 
favouring reduced demand that in turn leads to early emission reductions; this reduces the decarbonisation effort on 
the supply side.
SP Shifting PathwaysSuccessful international climate policy regime with a focus on additional SDG policies aiming, for example, at poverty 
reduction and broader environmental protection. Major transformations shift development towards sustainability and reduced 
inequality, including deep GHG emissions reduction.
reach specific temperature goals under varying assumptions? What 
are the consequences of different strategies to meet climate targets 
(i.e., demand-side strategy, a renewable energy strategy or a strategy 
with a role for net negative emissions)? What are the consequences 
of delay? What are the implications for other SDGs of various climate 
mitigation pathways?
1.6 Achieving Mitigation in the Context 
of Sustainable Development
This chapter now sets out approaches to understanding the 
mitigation challenge, working from its broad location in the context 
of wider aspirations for sustainable development, then identifying 
specific analytic approaches, before summarising the corresponding 
main dimensions used for the assessment of options and pathways 
in much of the report.
1.6.1 The Climate Change and 
Development Connection
Climate change mitigation is one of many goals that societies pursue 
in the context of sustainable development, as evidenced by the wide 
range of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Climate change 
and sustainable development, as well as development more broadly, 
are interwoven along multiple and complex lines of relationship 
(Okereke et al. 2009; Fankhauser and McDermott 2016; Okereke 
and Massaquoi 2017; Gomez-Echeverri 2018a), as highlighted in 
several previous IPCC reports (IPCC 2007, 2011a, 2014a, 2018b, 
2019a). With its significant negative impact on natural systems, 
food security and infrastructure, loss of lives and territories, species 
extinction, conflict health, among several other risks, climate change 
poses a serious threat to development and wellbeing in both rich and 
poor countries (IPCC 2007, 2011a, 2014a, 2018b, 2019b). Without 
serious efforts at mitigation and adaptation, climate change could 
push millions further into poverty and limit the opportunities for 
economic development (Chapters 4 and 17). It follows that ambitious 
climate mitigation is necessary to secure a safe climate within which 
development and well-being can be pursued and sustained.
At the same time, rapid and large-scale economic development (which 
has in the past driven climate change through land-use change and 
dependence on fossil fuels), is widely seen as needed to improve 
global well-being and lift millions especially in low- and middle-
income countries out of poverty (Chen et al. 2017; Mugambiwa and 
Tirivangasi 2017; Lu et al. 2019; Baarsch et al. 2020) (Figure  1.6). 
This strand of literature emphasises the importance of economic 
growth including for tackling climate change itself, pointing to the 
relationship between economic development and climate resilience 
as well as the role of industry-powered technologies such as electric 
vehicles in reducing GHG levels and promoting well-being (Heinrichs 
et al. 2014; Kasztelan 2017). Yet, others argue that the character 
of social and economic development produced by the nature of 
capitalist society (Pelling and Manuel-Navarrete 2011; Koch 2012; 
Malm 2016) is ultimately unsustainable.There are at least two major implications of the very close link 
between climate change and development as outlined above. The 
first is that the choice of development paths made by countries and 
regions have significant consequences for GHG emissions and efforts 
to combat climate change (Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 14). The second is 
that climate mitigation at local, national and global levels cannot be 
effectively achieved by a narrow focus on ‘climate-specific’ sectors, 
actors and policies, but rather through a much broader attention to 
the mix of development choices and the resulting development paths 
and trajectories (O’Neill et al. 2014) (Chapters 4, 6 and 10).
As a key staple of IPCC reports and the global climate policy landscape 
(IPCC 2007, 2014b; van Vuuren et al. 2017; Gidden et al. 2019; 
Quilcaille et al. 2019) (Chapter  2), integrated assessment models 
and global scenarios (such as the Shared Socio-economic Pathways – 
SSPs) highlight the interaction between development paths, climate 
change and emission stabilisation (Section 3.6). The close links are 
also recognised in the PA (Section 1.3.1).
The impact of climate change in limiting well-being is most acutely 
felt by the world’s poorest people, communities, and nations, who 
have the smallest carbon footprint, constrained capacity to respond 
and limited voice in important decision-making circles (Okereke and 
Ehresman 2015; Tosam and Mbih 2015; Mugambiwa and Tirivangasi 
2017). The wide variation in the contribution to, and impact of climate 
change within and across countries makes equity, inequality, justice, 
and poverty eradication, inescapable aspects of the relationship 
between sustainable development and climate change (Okereke 
and Coventry 2016; Klinsky et al. 2017; Reckien et al. 2017; Bos 
and Gupta 2019; Kayal et al. 2019; Diffenbaugh and Burke 2019; 
Baarsch et al. 2020). This underpins the conclusion, as commonly 
expressed, that climate action needs to be pursued in the context of 
sustainable development, equity and poverty eradication (Smit et al. 
2001; Tschakert and Olsson 2005; IPCC 2014a, 2018b; Klinsky and 
Winkler 2014).
1.6.2 Concepts and Frameworks for Integrating 
Climate Mitigation and Development
At one level, sustainable development can be seen as a  meta 
framework for integrating climate action with other global 
sustainability goals (Casadio Tarabusi and Guarini 2013; Antal and 
Van Den Bergh 2016). Fundamentally, the concept of sustainable 
development underscores the interlinkages and interdependence 
of human and natural systems and the need to balance economic, 
social, and environmental (including climate pollution) aspects in 
development planning and processes (Nunan 2017; Gomez-Echeverri 
2018b; Zhenmin and Espinosa 2019).
Despite the appeal of the concept, tensions remain over the 
interpretation and practical application, with acute disagreements 
regarding what the balancing entails in real life, how to measure 
well-being, which goals to set, and the means through which such 
goals might be pursued (Arrow et al. 2011; Dasgupta et al. 2015; 
Michelsen et al. 2016; Okereke and Massaquoi 2017; UNEP 2018b; 
Haberl et al. 2019; Shang et al. 2019; Sugiawan et al. 2019).
regarding their development path  – a condition which affects 
their capability, goals, priorities and approach to the pursuit of 
sustainability (Shi et al. 2016; Ramos-Mejía et al. 2018; Okereke et al. 
2019). Most of the literature recognises that despite its limitations, 
sustainable development with its emphasis on integrating social, 
economic and environmental goals, provides a more comprehensive 
approach to the pursuit of planetary health and human well-being. 
Sustainable development is then not a static objective but a dynamic 
framework for measuring human progress (Costanza et al. 2016; 
Fotis and Polemis 2018), relevant for all countries even if different 
groups of nations experience the challenge of sustainability in 
different ways.
Much like sustainable development, concepts like low-carbon 
development (Mulugetta and Urban 2010; Yuan et al. 2011; Wang 
et al. 2017; Tian et al. 2019), climate-compatible development 
(CCD) (Mitchell and Maxwell 2010; Tompkins et al. 2013; Stringer 
et al. 2014; Bickersteth et al. 2017) and more recently climate-
resilient development (CRD) (Fankhauser and McDermott 2016; 
Henly-Shepard et al. 2018; IPCC 2018b) have all emerged as 
ideas, tools and frameworks, intended to bring together the goals 
of climate mitigation and the SDGs, as well as development more 
broadly. Figure  1.5 suggests that the prospects for realising 
a climate-resilient and equitable world are enhanced by a process 
of transformation and development trajectories that seek to limit 
global warming while also achieving the SDGs. The SDGs represent 
medium-term goals, and long-term sustainability requires continued effort to keep the world along a climate-resilient development path. 
A  key feature of development or transformation pathways that 
achieve a climate-resilient world is that they maximise the synergies 
and minimise the trade-offs between climate mitigation and other 
sustainable development goals (Klausbruckner et al. 2016; Thornton 
and Comberti 2017; Wüstemann et al. 2017; Dagnachew et al. 2018; 
Fuso Nerini et al. 2018; Mainali et al. 2018). Crucially, the nature of 
trade-offs and timing of related decisions will vary across countries 
depending on circumstances including the level of development, 
capability and access to resources (Cross-Chapter Box  5, Shifting 
Development Paths to Increase Sustainability, in Chapter 4).
Other concepts such as ‘Doughnut Economics’ (Raworth 2018), 
ecological modernisation, and mainstreaming are also used to 
convey ideals of development pathways that take sustainability, 
climate mitigation, and environmental limits seriously (Dale et al. 
2015a). Mainstreaming focuses on incorporating climate change 
into national development activities, such as the building of 
infrastructure (Wamsler and Pauleit 2016; Runhaar et al. 2018). The 
‘green economy’ and green growth – growth without undermining 
ecological systems, partly by gaining economic value from cleaner 
technologies and systems and is inclusive and equitable in its 
outcomes – has gained popularity in both developed and developing 
countries as an approach for harnessing economic growth to address 
environmental issues (Bina 2013; Georgeson et al. 2017; Capasso 
et al. 2019; Song et al. 2020; Hao et al. 2021). However, critics argue 
that green economy ultimately emphasises economic growth to the 
detriment of other important aspects of human welfare such as social 
Figure  1.5 | A climate-resilient and equitable world requires limiting global warming while achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
Source: IPCC (2018b).
the central idea that it is possible to decouple economic activity 
and growth (measured as GDP increment) from increasing use of 
biophysical resources (raw materials, energy) (Jackson and Victor 
2019; Parrique et al. 2019; Haberl et al. 2020; Hickel and Kallis 2020; 
Vadén et al. 2020).
Literature on degrowth, post growth, and post development 
questions the sustainability and imperative of more growth 
especially in already industrialised countries and argues that 
prosperity and the ‘Good Life’ are not immutably tied to economic 
growth (Asara et al. 2015; Escobar 2015; Latouche 2018; Kallis 
2019) (Section  5.2.1). The concept of Just Transition also stresses 
the need to integrate justice concerns so as to not impose hardship 
on already marginalised populations within and between countries 
(Evans and Phelan 2016; Goddard and Farrelly 2018; Heffron and 
McCauley 2018; Smith, Jackie and Patterson 2018; McCauley 
and Heffron 2018) (Section 1.7.2). The key insight is that pursuing 
climate goals in the context of sustainable development requires 
holistic thinking including on how to measure well-being, serious 
consideration of the notion of ecological limits, at least some level 
of decoupling and certainly choices and decision-making approaches 
that exploit and maximise the synergy and minimise the trade-off 
between climate mitigation and other sustainable development 
goals. It also requires consideration of equity and justice within 
and between countries. However, ideas of a synergistic relationship 
between development and climate mitigation can sometimes offer 
limited practical guidelines for reconciling the tensions that are often 
present in practical policymaking (Ferguson et al. 2014; Dale et al. 
2015b; Kasztelan 2017; Kotzé 2018).
1.6.3 Climate Mitigation, Equity and the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)
Climate action can be conceptualised as both a  stand-alone and 
cross-cutting issue in the 2030 SDGs (Makomere and Liti Mbeva 
2018), given that several of the other goals such as ending poverty 
(SDG 1), zero hunger (SDG 2), good health and well-being (SDG 3), 
and affordable and clean energy (SDG 7), among many others, are 
related to climate change (Figure 3.39).
In addition to galvanising global collective action, the SDGs provide 
concrete themes, targets and indicators for measuring human 
progress to sustainability (Kanie and Biermann 2017). The SDGs also 
provide a basis for exploring the synergies and trade-offs between 
sustainable development and climate change mitigation (Pradhan 
et al. 2017; Fuso Nerini et al. 2018; Mainali et al. 2018; Makomere 
and Liti Mbeva 2018). Progress to date (Sachs et al. 2016) shows 
fulfilling SDGs is a challenge for all groups of countries – developed 

development dimensions consisting of a healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living. HDI is based on: life expectancy, expected years of schooling of children, 
the mean years of schooling of the adult population, and gross national income (GNI) per capita adjusted for purchasing power; the HIHD is based on: life expectancy 
at birth, adult literacy rates, educational enrolment rates, and GDP per capita, and is used in Figure 1.6 because it is available for a longer time series (Prados de la 
Escosura 2015).

Table 3.2 and Box 3.7.and developing  – even though the challenge differs between 
countries and regions (Pradhan et al. 2017).
Historically, the industrialisation associated with economic 
development has involved a strong relationship with GHG emissions 
(Section 5.2.1). Figure 1.6 shows per-capita GHG emissions on the 
vertical axis and Historical Index of Human Development (HIHD) 
levels (Prados de la Escosura 2015) on the horizontal axis.7 The 
grey line shows historic global average GHG emissions per capita 
and levels of human development over time, from 1870 to 2014. 
The current positions of different regions are shown by bubbles, 
with sizes representing total GHG emissions. Figure 1.6 also shows 
the estimated position of the SDGs zone for the year 2030, and 
a  ‘sustainable development corridor’ as countries reach towards 
higher HDI and lower emissions. To fulfil the SDGs, including SDG 13 
(climate action), the historic relationship needs to change.
The top of the SDG zone is situated around the global per-capita GHG 
emissions level of 5 tCO 2-eq required for the world to be path towards 
fulfilling the Paris Agreement.8 The horizontal position of the SDG 
zone is estimated based on the HIHD levels (Prados de la Escosura 
2015) of countries that have been shown to either have achieved, 
or have some challenges, when it comes to SDG 3, SDG 4 and SDG 

parts of the HIHD.  Beyond 2030, the sustainable development 
corridor allows for increasing levels of human development while 
lowering per-capita GHG emissions.
Figure 1.6 shows that at present, regions with HIHD levels of around 
0.5 all have emissions at or above about 5 tCO 2-eq per capita (even 
more so on a  consumption footprint basis; see Figure  1.1c,d), but 
there are wide variations within this. Indeed, there are regions with 
HIHD levels above 0.8 which have GHG per-capita emissions lower 
than several with HIHD levels of around 0.5. The mitigation challenge 
involves countries at many different stages of development seeking 
paths towards higher welfare with low emissions.
From Figure  1.6, there are two distinct dimensions to sustainable 
development pathways for fulfilling the SDGs. In terms of per-capita 
GHG emissions (the vertical), some regions have such low levels that 
they could increase and still be below the global average required 
in 2030 for the world to be on path to fulfil the Paris Agreement. 
Meanwhile, other regions with high per-capita GHG emissions would 
require a  rapid transformation in technologies and practices. It is 
against this background that Dubash (2019) emphasises placing the 
need for urgent action on climate change in the context of domestic 
political priorities and the institutions within which national 
frameworks are crystallised.
Concerns over equity in the context of growing global inequality 
and very tight remaining global carbon budgets have motivated 
an emphasis on equitable access to sustainable development 
(Peters et al. 2015; Kartha et al. 2018b; Matthews et al. 2019; van den 
Berg et al. 2019). This literature emphasises the need for less developed 
countries to have sufficient room for development while addressing 
climate change (Winkler et al. 2013; Pan et al. 2014; Gajevic Sayegh 
2017; Robinson and Shine 2018; Warlenius 2018). Meanwhile, many countries reliant on fossil fuels, related technologies and economic 
activities, are eager to ensure tax revenues are maintained, workers 
and industries have income and justice is embedded in the economic 
transformations required to limit GHG emissions (Cronin et al. 2021).
Correlation between CO 2 emission intensity, or absolute emission 
and gross domestic product growth, is not rigid, unambiguous and 
deterministic (Ojekunle et al. 2015), but the extent to which SDGs Developed Countries
Eastern Europe and West Central Asia Latin America and CaribbeanMiddle East Asia and Paciﬁc
Africa and Middle East
–505101525
20GHG emissions per capita (tonnes CO 2-eq)
0.1 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Development level (Historical Index of Human Development)Net negative emissions0.0Historical global per capita emissions 
and development from 1870 to 2014Historical global per capita emissions 
and development from 1870 to 2014Australia and 
New Zealand
USA and 
Canada
Eurasia
Middle 
East
Northern and 
Western Europe
Southern and 
Eastern EuropeJapan
Eastern Asia
South AmericaSouth-East Asia
Meso AmericaSouthern and Middle Africa
Northern Africa
India and Sri LankaCaribbeanEastern Africa
Western Africa
Rest of Southern AsiaSustainable Development CorridorSustainable Development Corridor
(1870)Sustainable 
Development PathwaysSustainable 
Development PathwaysSustainable 
Development 
PathwaysSustainable 
Development 
Pathways
Figure 1.6 | Sustainable development pathways towards fulfilling the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The graph shows global average per-capita 
GHG emissions (vertical axis) and relative ‘Historic Index of Human Development’ (HIHD) levels (horizontal) have increased globally since the industrial revolution (grey line). 
The bubbles on the graph show regional per-capita GHG emissions and human development levels in the year 2015, illustrating large disparities. Pathways towards fulfilling the 
Paris Agreement (and SDG 13) involve global average per-capita GHG emissions below about 5 tCO 2-eq by 2030. Likewise, to fulfil SDGs 3, 4 and 8, HIHD levels (see footnote 7) 
need to be at least 0.5 or greater. This suggests a ‘sustainable development zone’ for year 2030 (in pale brown); the in-figure text also suggests a ‘sustainable development 
corridor’, where countries limit per-capita GHG emissions while improving levels of human development over time. The emphasis of pathways into the sustainable development 
zone differ (dashed brown arrows), but in each case transformations are needed in how human development is attained while limiting GHG emissions.
GHG emissions remains a  concern (Haberl et al. 2020; Hickel and 
Kallis 2020). Below some thresholds of absolute poverty, more 
consumption is necessary for development to lead to well-being 
(Section  5.2.1.1), which may not be the case at higher levels of 
consumption (Lamb and Steinberger 2017; Steinberger et al. 2020) 
(Section 1.7.2).
In conclusion, achieving climate stabilisation in the context of 
sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty requires 
collective action and exploiting synergies between climate action 
and sustainable development, while minimising the impact of trade-
offs (Najam 2005; Okereke and Massaquoi 2017; Makomere and Liti 
Mbeva 2018; Dooley et al. 2021). It also requires a focus on equity 
considerations to avoid climate-induced harm, as well as unfairness 
that can result from urgent actions to cut emissions (Pan et al. 
2014; Robiou du Pont et al. 2017; Kartha et al. 2018a). This is ever 
more important as the diminishing carbon budget has intensified 
debates on which countries should have the greatest claim to the 
‘remaining space’ for emissions (Raupach et al. 2014) or production 
(McGlade and Ekins 2015), amplified by persistent concerns over 
the insufficiency of support for means of implementation, to support 
ambitious mitigation efforts (Pickering et al. 2015; Weikmans and 
Roberts 2019).
1.7 Four Analytic Frameworks 
for Understanding Mitigation 
Response Strategies
Climate change is unprecedented in its scope (sectors, actors and 
countries), depth (major transformations) and time scales (over 
generations). As such, it creates unique challenges for analysis. It has 
been called ‘the greatest market failure in history’ (Stern 2007); the 
‘perfect moral storm’ (Gardiner 2006) and a ‘super wicked problem’ 
(Lazarus 2009; Levin et al. 2012) – one which appears difficult to solve 
through the traditional tools and assumptions of social organisation 
and analysis.
To complement the extensive literature on risks and decision-
making under uncertainty reviewed in AR6 WGII (notably, 
Chapter  19), this section summarises insights and developments 
in key analytic frameworks and tools particularly relevant to 
understanding specific mitigation strategies, policies and other 
actions, including explaining the observed if limited progress 
to date. Organised partly as reflected in the quotes above, these 
include aggregated (principally, economic) frameworks to evaluate 
system-level choices; ethical perspectives on values and equity 
including stages of development and distributional concerns; and 
transition frameworks which focus on the processes and actors 
involved in major technological and social transitions. These need 
to be complemented by a  fourth set of approaches which shine 
more light on psychological/behavioural and political factors. All 
these frameworks are relevant, and together they point to the 
multiple perspectives and actions required if the positive drivers 
of emission reduction summarised in Section 4 are to outweigh the 
barriers and overcome the constraints.1.7.1 Aggregated Approaches: Economic Efficiency 
and Global Dynamics of Mitigation
Some of the most established and influential approaches to 
understanding the aggregate causes and consequences of climate 
change and mitigation across societies, draw upon economic 
theories and modelling to generate global emission pathways in 
the absence of climate policies and to study alternative mitigation 
pathways (described in detail in Section 3.2.5, and Appendix 3). The 
underlying economic concepts aggregate wealth or other measures 
of welfare based on utilitarian ethical foundations, and in most 
applications, a  number of additional assumptions detailed in AR5 
(Chapters 2 and 3).
1.7.1.1 Cost-benefit Analysis and Cost-effectiveness Analysis
Such global aggregate economic studies coalesce around two main 
questions. One, as pioneered by Nordhaus (1992, 2008) attempts to 
monetise overall climate damages and mitigation costs so as to strike 
a ‘cost-benefit optimum’ pathway. More detailed and empirically-
grounded ‘cost-effectiveness analysis’ explores pathways that would 
minimise mitigation costs (Ekholm 2014; IPCC 2014a Section  2.5; 
Weyant 2017) for given targets (e.g.,  as agreed in international 
negotiations, see Section 3.2 in Chapter 3). Both approaches recognise 
that resources are limited and climate change competes with other 
priorities in government policymaking, and are generally examined 
with some form of Integrated Assessment Model (IAM) (Section 1.5 
and Appendix III). Depending on the regional disaggregation of the 
modelling tools used and on the scope of the analyses, these studies 
may or may not address distributional aspects within and across 
nations associated with climate policies (Bauer et al. 2020).
For at least 10 to 15 years after the first computed global cost-benefit 
estimate (Nordhaus 1992), the dominant conclusions from these 
different approaches seemed to yield very different recommendations, 
with cost-benefit studies suggesting lenient mitigation compared 
to the climate targets typically recommended from scientific risk 
assessments (Weyant 2017). Over the past 10 to 15 years, literature 
has made important strides towards reconciling these two approaches, 
both in the analytic methods and the conclusions arising.
Damages and risks. Incorporating impacts which may be extremely 
severe but are uncertain (known as ‘fat tails’ (Weitzman 2009, 
2011)), strengthens the economic case for ambitious action to avoid 
risks of extreme climate impacts (Ackerman et al. 2010; Fankhauser 
et al. 2013; Dietz and Stern 2015). The salience of risks has also been 
amplified by improved understanding of climate ‘tipping points’ 
(Lontzek et al. 2015; Lenton et al. 2019); valuations should reflect 
that cutting emissions reduces not only average expected damages, 
but also the risk of catastrophic events (IWG 2021).
Discounting. The role of time discounting in weighting future climate 
change impacts against today’s costs of mitigating emissions has been 
long recognised (Weitzman 1994, 2001; Nordhaus 2007; Stern 2007; 
Dasgupta 2008). Its importance is underlined in analytical Integrated 
Assessment Models (IAMs) (Golosov et al. 2014; van  den Bijgaart 
et al. 2016; van der Ploeg and Rezai 2019) (Annex III). Economic 
rates when evaluating overall climate strategy (Weitzman 2001; 
Dasgupta 2008; Arrow et al. 2013; Groom and Hepburn 2017). Expert 
elicitations indicate values around 2% (majority) to 3% (Drupp et al. 
2018). This is lower than in many of the studies reviewed in earlier 
IPCC assessments, and many IAM studies since, and by increasing the 
weight accorded to the future would increase current ‘optimal effort’. 
The US Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon used 
3% as its central value (IAWG 2016; Li and Pizer 2018; Adler et al. 
2017). Individual projects may require specific risk adjustments.
Distribution of impacts. The economic damages from climate 
change at the nationally aggregated and sub-national level are very 
diverse (Moore et al. 2017; Ricke et al. 2018; Carleton et al. 2020). 
A ‘global damage function’ necessarily implies aggregating impacts 
across people and countries with different levels of income, and over 
generations, a process which obscures the strategic considerations 
that drive climate policymaking (Keohane and Oppenheimer 2016). 
Economics acknowledges there is no single, objectively defined 
‘social welfare function’ (IPCC 1995, 2014a). This applies also to 
the distribution of responses: both underline the relevance of equity 
(next section) and global negotiations to determine national and 
collective objectives.
Obvious limitations arise from these multiple difficulties in assessing 
an objective, globally acceptable single estimate of climate change 
damages (e.g., Arrow et al. 2013; Pindyck 2013; Auffhammer 2018; 
Stern et al. 2021), with some arguing that agreement on a specific 
value can never be expected (Rosen and Guenther 2015; Pezzey 2018). 
A  new generation of cost-benefits analysis, based on projections 
of actual observed damages, results in stronger mitigation efforts 
as optimal (Glanemann et al. 2020; Hänsel et al. 2020). Overall, 
the combination of improved damage functions with the wider 
consensus on low discount rates (as well as lower mitigation costs 
due to innovation) has increasingly yielded ‘optimal’ results from 
benefit-cost studies in line with the range established in the Paris 
Agreement (Cross-Working Group Box 1 in Chapter 3).
Hybrid cost-benefit approaches that extend the objective of the 
optimisation beyond traditional welfare, adding some form of 
temperature targets as in Llavador et al. (2015) and Held (2019) also 
represent a step in bridging the gap between the two approaches and 
result in proposed strategies much more in line with those coming 
from the cost-effectiveness literature. Approaching from the opposite 
side, cost-effectiveness studies have looked into incorporating 
benefits from avoided climate damages, to improve the assessment 
of net costs (Drouet et al. 2021).
Cost-benefit IAMs utilise damage functions to derive a social cost of 
CO2 emissions’ (SCC  – the additional cost to society of a  pulse 
of  CO 2 emissions). One review considered that ‘the best estimate’ 
of the optimal (near-term) level ‘still ranges from a few tens to a few 
hundreds of dollars per ton of carbon’ (Tol 2018), with various recent 
studies in the hundreds, taking account of risks (Taconet et al. 2019), 
learning (Ekholm 2018) and distribution (Ricke et al. 2018). In addition 
to the importance of uncertainty/risk, aggregation, and realistic 
damage functions as noted, on which some progress has been made, some reviews additionally critique how IAMs represent abatement 
costs in terms of energy efficiency and innovation (e.g., Farmer et al. 
2015; Rosen and Guenther 2015; Keen 2021) (Sections  1.7.3 and 
1.7.4). IAMs may better reflect associated ‘rebound’ at system level 
(Saunders et al. 2021), and inefficient implementation would raise 
mitigation costs (Homma et al. 2019); conversely, co-benefits – most 
extensively estimated for air quality, valued at a  few tens of USD 
per tCO 2-eq across 16 studies (Karlsson et al. 2020) – complement 
global with additional local benefits (Table 1.2).
Whereas many of these factors affect primarily cost-benefit 
evaluation, discounting also determines the cost-effective trajectory: 
Emmerling et al. (2019) find that, for a  remaining budget of 

than double current efforts, limit ‘overshoot’, greatly reduce a late 
rush to negative emissions, and improve intergenerational justice by 
more evenly distributing policy costs across the 21st century.
1.7.1.2 Dynamic Efficiency and Uncertainty
Care is required to clarify what is optimised (Dietz and Venmans 
2019). Optimising a  path towards a  given temperature goal by 
a fixed date (e.g., 2100) gives time-inconsistent results backloaded to 
large, last-minute investment in carbon dioxide removal (CDR). ‘Cost-
effective’ optimisations generate less initial effort than equivalent 
cost-benefit models (Dietz and Venmans 2019; Gollier 2021) as they 
do not incorporate benefits of reducing impacts earlier.
‘Efficient pathways’ are affected by inertia and innovation. Inertia 
implies amplifying action on long-lived investments and infrastructure 
that could otherwise lock-in emissions for many decades (Vogt-Schilb 
et al. 2018; Baldwin et al. 2020). Chapter 3 (Section 3.5) discusses 
interactions between near-, medium- and long-term actions in 
global pathways, particularly vis-à-vis inertia. Also, to the extent 
that early action induces low-carbon innovation, it ‘multiplies’ the 
optimal effort (for given damage assumptions), because it facilitates 
subsequent cheaper abatement. For example, a ‘learning-by-doing’ 
analysis concludes that early deployment of expensive PV was of net 
global economic benefit, due to induced innovation (Newbery 2018).
Research thus increasingly emphasises the need to understand 
climate transformation in terms of dynamic, rather than static, 
efficiency (Gillingham and Stock 2018). This means taking account of 
inertia, learning and various additional sources of ‘path-dependence’. 
Including induced innovation in stylised IAMs can radically change 
the outlook (Acemoglu et al. 2012, 2016), albeit with limitations 
(Pottier et al. 2014); many more detailed-process IAMs now do 
include endogenous technical change (as reviewed in Yang et al. 

These dynamic and uncertainty effects typically justify greater upfront 
effort (Kalkuhl et al. 2012; Bertram et al. 2015), including accelerated 
international diffusion (Schultes et al. 2018), and strengthen optimal 
initial effort in cost-benefit models (Baldwin et al. 2020; Grubb et al. 
2021b). Approaches to risk premia common in finance would similarly 
amplify the initial mitigation effort, declining as uncertainties reduce 
(Daniel et al. 2019).
and Evolutionary Approaches
Other approaches to aggregate evaluation draw on various branches 
of intrinsically non-equilibrium theories (e.g.,  Chang 2014). These 
including long-standing theories from the 1930s (e.g., Schumpeter 
1934; Keynes 1936) to understand situations of structurally 
underemployed resources, potential financial instabilities (Minsky 
1986), and related economic approaches which emphasise time 
dimensions (e.g.,  recent reviews in Legrand and Hagemann 2017; 
Stern 2018). More recently developing have been formal economic 
theories of endogenous growth building on, for example, Romer 
(1986), and developments of Schumpeterian creative destruction 
(Aghion et al. 2021) and evolutionary economic theories which 
abandon any notion of full or stable resource utilisation even 
as a  reference concept (Nelson and Winter 1982; Freeman and 
Perez 1988; Carlsson and Stankiewicz 1991; Freeman and Louçã 
2001; Perez 2001).
The latter especially are technically grounded in complex system 
theories (e.g.,  Arthur 1989, 1999; Beinhocker 2007; Hidalgo and 
Hausmann 2009). These take inherently dynamic views of economies 
as continually evolving systems with continuously unfolding and 
path-dependent properties, and emphasise uncertainty in contrast to 
any predictable or default optimality. Such approaches have been 
variously applied in policy evaluation (Walton 2014; Moore et al. 
2018), and specifically for global decarbonisation (e.g., Barker and 
Crawford-Brown 2014) using global simulation models. Because 
these have no natural reference ‘least lost’ trajectory, they illustrate 
varied and divergent pathways and tend to emphasise the diversity 
of possibilities and relevant policies, particularly linked to innovation 
and potentially ‘sensitive intervention points’ (Farmer et al. 2019) 
(Section  1.7.3). They also illustrate that different representations 
of innovation and financial markets together can explain why 
estimated impacts of mitigation on GDP can differ very widely 
(potentially even in sign), between different model types (Chapter 15, 
Section 15.6.3 and Box 15.7).
1.7.2 Ethical Approaches
Gardiner’s (2011) book on climate change as ‘The Perfect Moral 
Storm’ identified three ‘tempests’. Its global dimension, in a world 
of sovereign states which have only fragmentary responsibility 
and control, makes it ‘difficult to generate the moral consideration 
and necessary political will’. Its impacts are intergenerational but 
future generations have no voice in contemporary affairs, the usual 
mechanism for addressing distributional injustices, amplified by 
the intrinsic inequity of wealthy big emitters impacting particularly 
poorer victims. He argues that these are exacerbated by a  third, 
theoretical failure to acknowledge a  central need for ‘moral 
sensitivity, compassion, transnational and transgenerational care, 
and other forms of ethical concern to rise to the surface’ to help 
guide effective climate action. As noted in Section 1.4.6, however, 
equity and ethics are both a driver of and constraint on mitigation.1.7.2.1 Ethics and Values
A large body of literature examines the critical role of values, ethics, 
attitudes, and behaviours as foundational frames for understanding 
and assessing climate action, sustainable development and societal 
transformation ( IPCC 2014a Chapter 3). Most of this work is offered 
as a  counterpoint or critique to mainstream literature’s focus on 
the safeguarding of economic growth of nations, corporations 
and individuals (Castree 2017; Gunster 2017). These perspectives 
highlight the dominance of economic utilitarianism in western 
philosophical thought as a key driver for unsustainable consumption 
and global environmental change (Hoeing et al. 2015; Popescu 2016).
Entrenching alternative values that promote deep decarbonisation, 
environmental conservation and protection across all levels of society 
is then viewed as foundational component of climate-resilient and 
sustainable development and for achieving human rights, and a safe 
climate world (Evensen 2015; Jolly et al. 2015; Popescu 2016; Tàbara 
et al. 2019). The UN Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner 
has highlighted the potentially crucial role of human rights in relation 
to climate change (UNHCR 2018). While acknowledging the role of 
policy, technology, and finance, the ‘managerialist’ approaches, that 
emphasise ‘technical governance’ and fail to challenge the deeper 
values that underpin society, may not secure the deep change 
required to avert dangerous climate change and other environmental 
challenges (Hartzell-Nichols 2014; Steinberger et al. 2020).
Social justice perspectives emphasise the distribution of 
responsibilities, rights, and mutual obligations between nations 
in navigating societal transformations (Gawel and Kuhlicke 2017; 
Leach et al. 2018; Patterson et al. 2018). Current approaches to 
climate action may fail to match what is required by science because 
they tend to circumvent constraints on human behaviour, especially 
constraints on economic interest and activity. Related literature 
explores governance models that are centred on environmental limits, 
planetary boundaries and the moral imperative to prioritise the poor 
in earth systems governance (Carley and Konisky 2020; Kashwan 
et al. 2020), with emphasis on trust and solidarity as foundations 
for global cooperation on climate change (Jolly et al. 2015). A key 
obstacle is that the economic interests of states tend to be stronger 
than the drivers for urgent climate action (Bain 2017).
Short-term interests of stakeholders are acknowledged to impede 
the reflection and deliberation needed for climate mitigation 
and adaptation planning (Hackmann 2016; Sussman et al. 2016; 
Schlosberg et al. 2017; Herrick 2018). Situationally appropriate 
mitigation and adaptation policies at both national and international 
level may require more ethical self-reflection (Herrick 2018), including 
self-transcendent values such as universalism and benevolence, 
and moderation which are positively related to pro-environmental 
behaviours (Jonsson and Nilsson 2014; Katz-Gerro et al. 2015; Braito 
et al. 2017; Howell and Allen 2017).
Another strong theme in the literature concerns recognition of 
interdependence including the intimate relationship between 
humans and the non-human world (Hannis 2016; Gupta and Racherla 
2018; Howell and Allen 2017), with such ecological interdependence 
to sustainability. A  key policy implication of this is moving away 
from valuing nature only in market and monetary terms to strongly 
incorporating existential and non-material value of nature in natural-
resource accounting (Neuteleers and Engelen 2015; Shackleton et al. 
2017; Himes-Cornell et al. 2018). There has been increasing attention 
on ways to design climate policy frameworks to help reconcile 
ecological virtue (with its emphasis on the collective) with individual 
freedoms and personal autonomy (Kasperbauer 2016; Nash et al. 2017; 
Xiang et al. 2019). In such a framework, moderation, fairness, and 
stewardship are all understood and promoted as directly contributing 
to the ‘good life’. Such approaches are deemed vital to counteract 
tendencies to ‘free ride’, and to achieve behavioural changes often 
associated with tackling climate change (Section 5.2.1).
Some literature suggests that attention to emotions, especially 
with regards to climate communication, could help societies and 
individuals act in ways that focus less on monetary gain and more 
on climate and environmental sustainability (Bryck and Ellis 2016; 
Chapman et al. 2017; Nabi et al. 2018; Zummo et al. 2020).
1.7.2.2 Equity and Representation: International Public 
Choice Across Time and Space
Equity perspectives highlight three asymmetries relevant for climate 
change (Okereke and Coventry 2016; Okereke 2017) (Section 1.4.6). 
Asymmetry in contribution highlights different contributions to climate 
change both in historical and current terms, and applies both within 
and between states as well as between generations (Caney 2016; 
Heyward and Roser 2016). Asymmetry in impacts highlights the fact 
that the damages will be borne disproportionately across countries, 
regions, communities, individuals and gender; moreover, it is often 
those that have contributed the least that stand to bear the greatest 
impact of climate change (IPCC 2014a; Shi et al. 2016). Asymmetry in 
capacity highlights differences of power between groups and nations 
to participate in climate decision and governance, including the 
capacity to implement mitigation and adaptation measures.
If attention is not paid to equity, efforts designed to tackle climate 
change may end up exacerbating inequities among communities and 
between countries (Heffron and McCauley 2018). The implication is 
that to be sustainable in the long run, mitigation involves a central 
place for consideration of justice, both within and between countries 
(Chapters 4 and 14). Arguments that the injustices following from 
climate change are symptomatic of a more fundamental structural 
injustice in social relations, are taken to imply a need to address the 
deeper inequities within societies (Routledge et al. 2018).
Climate change and climate policies affect countries and people 
differently, with the poor likely to be more affected (Section 1.6.1). 
Ideas of Just Transitions (outlined in Section  1.8.2.) often have 
a  national focus in the literature, but also imply that mitigation 
should not increase the asymmetries between rich and poor countries, 
implying a  desire for transitions which seek to reduce (or at least 
avoid adverse) distributional affects. Thus, it comes into play in the 
timing of zero emissions (Chapters 3 and 14). International climate 
finance in which rich countries finance mitigation and adaptation in poor countries is also essential for reducing the asymmetries between 
rich and poor countries (Section 1.6.3 and Chapter 15).
Equity across generations  – the distribution between the present 
and future generations  – also matters. One aspect is discounting 
(Section  1.7.1). Another approach has been to study the burdens 
on each generation following from the transition to low-carbon 
economies (IPCC 2014a Chapter 3) (Cross-Working Group Box 3 in 
Chapter  12). Suggestions include shifting more investments into 
‘natural capital’, so that future generations will inherit less physical 
capital but a better environment, or financing mitigation efforts today 
using governmental debt redeemed by future generations (Heijdra 
et al. 2006; Broome 2012; Karp and Rezai 2014; Hoel et al. 2019).
1.7.3 Transition and Transformation Processes
This report uses the term transition as the process, and transformation 
as the overall change or outcome, of large-scale shifts in technological, 
economic and social systems, called socio-technical systems in 
the innovation literature. Typically, new technologies, ideas and 
associated systems initially grow slowly in absolute terms, but may 
then ‘take-off’ in a phase of exponential growth as they emerge from 
a  position of niche into mainstream diffusion, as indicated by the 
‘S-curve’ growth in Figure  1.7 (lower panel). These dynamics arise 
from interactions between innovation (in technologies, companies 
and other organisations), markets, infrastructure and institutions, 
at multiple levels (Geels et al. 2017; Kramer 2018). Consequently, 
interdisciplinary perspectives are needed (Turnheim et al. 2015; 
Geels et al. 2016; Hof et al. 2020). Beyond aggregated economic 
perspectives on dynamics (Section  1.7.1.2), these emphasise the 
multiple actors and processes involved.
Technological Innovation Systems (TIS) frameworks (Section  16.4) 
focus on processes and policies of early innovation and ‘emergence’, 
which combine experimentation and commercialisation, involving 
Strategic Niche Management (Rip and Kemp 1998; Geels and Raven 
2006). Literatures on the wider processes of transition highlight 
different stages (e.g.,  Cross-Chapter Box  12 in Chapter  16) and 
scales across three main levels, most generally termed micro, meso 
and macro (Rotmans et al. 2001).
The widely-used Multi-Level Perspective or MLP (Geels 2002) identifies 
the meso level as the established ‘socio-technical (ST) regime’, 
a set of interrelated sub-systems which define rules and regulatory 
structures around existing technologies and practices. The micro level 
is an ecosystem of varied niche alternatives, and overlaying the ST 
regime is a macro ‘landscape’ level. Transitions often start with niche 
alternatives (Grin et al. 2010; Köhler et al. 2019), which may break 
through to wider diffusion (second stage in Figure 1.8), especially if 
external landscape developments ‘create pressures on the regime that 
lead to cracks, tensions and windows of opportunity’ (Rotmans et al. 
2001; Geels 2010); an example is climate change putting sustained 
pressure on current regimes of energy production and consumption 
(Kuzemko et al. 2016). There are continual interactions between 
landscape, regime and niches, with varied implications for Transition 
Management (Rotmans et al. 2001; Loorbach 2010).
R&D, demand-pull, infrastructure and industrial development
Established technologies
Prices, taxes, market structures,
planning and regulation
STRATEGIC INVESTMENT
Standards, engagement and dissemination programmes
NORMS AND BEHAVIOUR
MARKET
MACRO
MESO
MICRO
LANDSCAPE
SOCIO-
TECHINCAL
REGIME
NICHE
Unsuccessful technology
Niche alternatives
Policy pillars
(relative importance at different stages)
Stages of
transition
Spread of technology/behaviour/idea
Time
Reconﬁguration
EMERGENCEBREAKTHROUGH
& DIFFUSIONMATURATION
Figure 1.7 | Transition dynamics: levels, policies and processes.  Note: the lower panel illustrates growth of innovative technologies or practices, which if successful 
emerge from niches into an S-shape dynamic of exponential growth. The diffusion stage often involves new infrastructure and reconfiguration of existing market and regulatory 
structures (known in the literature as the ‘socio-technical regime’). During the phase of more widespread diffusion, growth levels off to linear, then slows as the industry and 
market matures. The processes displace incumbent technologies/practices which decline, initially slowly but then at an accelerating pace. Many related literatures identify three 
main levels with different characteristics, most generally termed micro, meso and macro. Transitions can be accelerated by policies appropriately targeted, which may be similarly 
grouped and sequenced (upper panel) in terms of three corresponding pillars of policy (Section 1.7.3): generally all are relevant, but their relative importance differs according 
to the stage of the transition.
smooth change (e.g.,  elasticities), transition theories emphasise 
interdisciplinary approaches and the non-linear dynamics, social, 
economic and environmental aspects of transitions to sustainability 
(Cherp et al. 2018; Köhler et al. 2018). This may explain persistent 
tendencies to underestimate the exponential pace of change now 
being observed in renewable electricity (Chapters  2 and 6) and 
emerging in mobility (Chapter 10).
Recent decades have seen parallel broadening of economic 
perspectives and theories. Building also on the New Institutional 
Economics literatures, Building on the New Institutional Economics 
literature (Williamson 2000), Grubb et al. (2014, 2015) classify these 
into three ‘domains of economic decision-making’ associated with 
different branches of economic theory, respectively (i) behavioural 
and organisational; (ii) neoclassical and welfare; and (iii) evolutionary 
and institutional. Like MLP , these are related to different social and 
temporal scales, as applied also in studying the ‘adaptive finance’ 
in UK electricity transition (Hall et al. 2017). There are significant 
differences but these approaches all point to understanding the 
characteristics of different actors, notably, individuals/local actors; 
larger corporate organisations (public or private); and (mainly) public 
authorities, each with different decision-making characteristics.
Sustainability may require purposeful actions at the different levels 
to foster the growth of sustainable technologies and practices, 
including support for niche alternatives (Grin et al. 2010). The middle 
level (established ‘socio-technical regime’) tends to resist major 
change, reforms generally involve pressures from the other two 
levels. Thus, transitions can be accelerated by policies appropriately 
targeting relevant actors at the different levels (Köhler et al. 2019), 
the foundations for ‘three pillars of policy’ (Grubb et al. 2014), which 
logically evolve in the course of transition (Figure 2.6a). Incumbent 
industries have to adapt if they are to thrive within the growth of 
new systems. Policy may need to balance existing socio-technical 
systems with strategic investment and institutional development 
of the emerging niches (e.g., the maintenance of energy provision 
and energy security with the development of renewables), and help 
manage declining industries (Koasidis et al. 2020).
There is usually a  social dimension to such transitions. Key 
elements include capacity to transform (Folke et al. 2010), planning, 
and interdisciplinarity (Woiwode 2013). The Second World War 
demonstrated the extent to which crises can motivate (sometimes 
positive) change across complex social and technical systems, 
including industry, and agriculture which then doubled its productivity 
over 15 years (Roberts and Geels 2019b). In practice, climate change 
may involve a combination of (reactive) transformational adaptation, 
and (proactive) societal transformation (Feola 2015), the latter 
seen as reorientation (including values and norms) in a sustainable 
direction (Section 5.4), including, for example, ‘democratisation’ in 
energy systems (Sorman et al. 2020). Business change management 
principles could be relevant to support positive social change (Stephan 
et al. 2016). Overall, effective transitions rest on appropriate enabling 
conditions, which can also link socio-technical transitions to broader 
development pathways (Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 16).Transition theories tend to come from very different disciplines and 
approaches compared to either economics or other social sciences, 
with less quantification, notwithstanding evolutionary and complex 
system models (Section  1.7.1.3). However, a  few distinct types of 
quantitative models of ‘socio-technical energy transition’ (Li et al. 
2015) have emerged. For policy evaluation, transitions can be viewed 
as processes in which dynamic efficiency (Section 1.7.2) dominates 
over static allocative efficiency, with potential ‘positive intervention 
points’ (Farmer et al. 2019). Given inherent uncertainties, there are 
obvious risks (e.g., Alic and Sarewitz 2016). All this may make an 
evaluation framework of risks and opportunities more appropriate 
than traditional cost-benefit (Mercure et al. 2021), and (drawing on 
lessons from renewables and electric vehicles) create foundations 
for sector-based international ‘positive sum cooperation’ in climate 
mitigation (Sharpe and Lenton 2021).
1.7.4 Approaches From Psychology and Politics 
of Changing Course
The continued increase in global emissions to 2019, despite three 
decades of scientific warnings of ever-greater clarity and urgency, 
motivates growing attention in the literature to the psychological 
‘faults of our rationality’ (Bryck and Ellis 2016), and the political 
nature of climate mitigation.
1.7.4.1 Psychological and Behavioural Dimensions
The AR5 emphasised that decision processes often include both 
deliberate (‘calculate the costs and benefits’) and intuitive thinking, 
the latter utilising emotion- and rule-based responses that are 
conditioned by personal past experience, social context, and cultural 
factors (e.g.,  Kahneman 2003), and that laypersons tend to judge 
risks differently than experts  – for example, ‘intuitive’ reactions 
are often characterised by biases to the status quo and aversion to 
perceived risks and ambiguity (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Many 
of these features of human reasoning create ‘psychological distance’ 
from climate change (Spence et al. 2012; Marshall 2014). These can 
impede adequate personal responses, in addition to the collective 
nature of the problem, where such problems can take the form of 
‘uncomfortable knowledge’, neglected and so becoming ‘unknown 
knowns’ (Sarewitz 2020). These decision processes, and the 
perceptions that shape them, have been studied through different 
lenses from psychology (Weber 2016) to sociology (Guilbeault 
et al. 2018), and media studies (Boykoff 2011). Karlsson and Gilek 
(2020) identify science denialism and ‘decision thresholds’ as key 
mechanisms of delay.
Experimental economics (Allcott 2011) also helps explain why 
cost-effective energy efficiency measures or other mitigation 
technologies are not taken up as fast or as widely as the benefits 
might suggest, including procrastination and inattention, as 
‘we often resist actions with clear long-term benefits if they are 
unpleasant in the short run’ (Allcott and Mullainathan 2010). 
Incorporating behavioural and social dynamics in models is required 
particularly to better represent the demand side (Nikas et al. 2020), 
for example, Safarzyńska (2018) demonstrates how behavioural 
instruments. A  key perspective is to eschew ‘either/or’ between 
economic and behavioural frameworks, as the greatest effects 
often involve combining behavioural dimensions (e.g.,  norms, 
social influence networks, convenience and quality assurance) with 
financial incentives and information (Stern et al. 2010). Randomised, 
controlled field trials can help predict the effects of behavioural 
interventions (Levitt and List 2009; McRae and Meeks 2016; Gillan 
2017). Chapter 5 explores both positive and negative dimensions 
of behaivour in more depth, including the development of norms 
and interactions with the wider social context, with emphasis upon 
the services associated with human well-being, rather than the 
economic activities per se.
1.7.4.2 Socio-political and Institutional Approaches
Political and institutional dynamics shape climate change responses in 
important ways, not least because incumbent actors have frequently 
blocked climate policy (Section  1.4.5). Institutional perspectives 
probe networks of opposition (Brulle 2019) and emphasise that 
their ability to block – as well as the ability of others to foster low-
carbon transitions  – are structured by specific institutional forms 
across countries (Lamb and Minx 2020). National institutions 
have widely been developed to promote traditionally fossil fuel-
based sectors like electricity and transport as key to economic 
development, contributing to carbon lock-in (Seto et al. 2016) and 
inertia (Rosenschöld et al. 2014).
The influence of interest groups on policymaking varies across 
countries. Comparative political economy approaches tend to 
find that countries where interests are closely coordinated by 
governments (‘coordinated market economies’) have been able to 
generate transformative change more than those with a more arms-
length, even combative relationship between interest groups and 
governments (‘liberal market economies’) (Lachapelle and Paterson 
2013; Ćetković and Buzogány 2016; Zou et al. 2016; Meckling 2018). 
‘Developmental states’ often have the capacity for strong intervention 
but any low-carbon interventions may be overwhelmed by other 
pressures and very rapid economic growth (Wood et al. 2020a).
Institutional features affecting climate policy include levels and 
types of democracy (Povitkina 2018), electoral systems, or levels 
of institutional centralisation (federal vs unitary states, presidential 
vs parliamentary systems) (Lachapelle and Paterson 2013; Steurer 
and Clar 2018; Clulow 2019). Countries that have constructed 
an overarching architecture of climate governance institutions 
(e.g.,  cross-department and multi-level coordination, and semi-
autonomous climate agencies), are more able to develop the strategic 
approaches to climate governance needed to foster transformative 
change (Dubash 2021).
Access of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to policy 
processes enables new ideas to be adopted, but too close an NGO-
government relation may stifle innovation and transformative action 
(Dryzek et al. 2003). NGO campaigns on fracking (Neville et al. 
2019) or divestment (Mangat et al. 2018) have raised attention to 
ideas such as ‘stranded assets’ in policy arenas (Green 2018; Piggot 2018; Newell et al. 2020; Paterson 2021). Attempts to depoliticise 
climate change may narrow the space for democratic participation 
and contestation, thus impacting policy responses (Swyngedouw 
2010, 2011; Kenis and Lievens 2014). Some institutional innovations 
have more directly targeted enhanced public deliberation and 
participation, notably in citizens’ climate assemblies (Howarth et al. 
2020) and in the use of legal institutions to litigate against those 
opposing climate action (Peel and Osofksy 2020). This literature 
shows that transformative pathways are possible within a  variety 
of institutional settings, although institutional innovation will be 
necessary everywhere to pursue zero carbon transitions (Section 4.4, 
Chapter 13 and Cross-Chapter Box 12).
Balancing the forces outlined in Section  4.6 in Chapter  4  typically 
involves building coalitions of actors who benefit economically from 
climate policy (Levin et al. 2012). Policy stability is critical to enabling 
long-term investments in decarbonisation (Rietig and Laing 2017; 
Rosenbloom et al. 2018). Policy design can encourage coalitions 
to form that sustain momentum by supporting further policy 
development to accelerate decarbonisation (Roberts et al. 2018), for 
example, by generating concentrated benefits to coalition members 
(Bernstein and Hoffmann 2018; Meckling 2019; Millar et al. 2020), as 
with renewable feed-in tariffs (FiTs) in Germany (Michaelowa et al. 
2018). Coalitions may also be sustained by overarching framings, 
especially to involve actors (e.g.,  NGOs) for whom the benefits of 
climate policy are not narrowly economic. However, policy design 
can also provoke coalitions to oppose climate policy, as in the FiT 
programme in Ontario (Stokes 2013; Raymond 2020) or the yellow 
vest protests against carbon taxation in France (Berry and Laurent 
2019). The Just Transitions frame can thus also be understood in 
terms of coalition-building, as well as ethics, as the pursuit of low-
carbon transitions which spread the economic benefits broadly, 
through ‘green jobs’, and the redistributive policies embedded in 
them both nationally and globally (Healy and Barry 2017; Winkler 
2020). Appropriate policy design will be different at different stages 
of the transition process (Meckling et al. 2017; Breetz et al. 2018).
Integration. Politics is ultimately the way in which societies make 
decisions  – which in turn, reflect diverse forces and assumed 
frameworks. Effective policy requires understandings which combine 
economic efficiency, ethics and equity, the dynamics and processes 
of large-scale transitions, and the role of psychology and politics. 
No one framework is adequate to such a  broad-ranging goal, nor 
are single tools. Chapter  13 (Figure  13.6) presents a  ‘framing’ 
table for policy instruments depending on the extent to which they 
focus on mitigation per se or wider socio-economic development, 
and whether they aim to shift marginal incentives or drive larger 
transitions. Holistic analysis needs to bridge modelling, qualitative 
transition theories illuminated by case studies, and practice-based 
action research (Geels et al. 2016).
These analytic frameworks also point to arenas of potential 
synergies and trade-offs (when broadly known), and opportunities 
and risks (when uncertainties are greater), associated with 
mitigation. This offers theoretical foundations for mitigation 
strategies which can also generate co-benefits. Climate policy 
may help to motivate policies with beneficial synergies (such as 
the consumer cost savings from energy efficiency, better forest 
management, transitions to cleaner vehicles) and opportunities 
(such as stimulating innovation), by focusing on options for 
which the positives outweigh the negatives, or can be made to 
be, through smart policy (e.g., Karlsson et al. 2020). More broadly, 
climate concerns may help to attract international investment, and 
help overcoming bureaucratic or political obstacles to better policy, 
and support synergies between mitigation, adaptation, and other 
SDGs, a  foundation for shifting development pathways towards 
sustainability (Chapter 17 and Section 1.6.1).
1.8 Feasibility and Multi-dimensional 
Assessment of Mitigation
1.8.1 Building on the SR1.5 Assessment Framework: 
Feasibility and Enabling Conditions
While previous ARs dealt with the definition of alternative mitigation 
pathways mostly exploring the technological potentials, the latest 
research focused on what kind of mitigation pathways are feasible 
in a broader sense, underlining the multi-dimensional nature of the 
mitigation challenge. Building on frameworks introduced by Majone 
(1975) and Gilabert and Lawford-Smith (2012), SR1.5 introduced 
multi-dimensional approaches to analysing ‘feasibility’ and ‘enabling 
conditions’, which AR6 develops and applies broadly in relation to 
six ‘dimensions of feasibility assessment’ (Figure 1.8). Two reflect the 
physical environment:
• Geophysical, not only the global risks from climate change 
but also, for technology assessment, the global availability of 
critical resources.
• Environmental and ecological, including local environmental 
constraints and co-benefits of different technologies and pathways.
The other four dimensions correspond broadly to the four analytic 
frameworks outlined in Section 1.7:
• Economic, particularly aggregate economic and financial 
indicators, and SDGs reflecting different stages and goals of 
economic development.
• Socio-cultural, including particularly ethical and justice 
dimensions, and social and cultural norms.
• Technological, including innovation needs and transitional 
dynamics associated with new and emergent technologies and 
associated systems.• Institutional and political, including political acceptability, legal 
and administrative feasibility, and the capacity and governance 
requirements at different levels to deliver sustained mitigation in 
the wider context of sustainable development.
The AR6 emphasises that all pathways involve different challenges 
and require choices to be made. Continuing ‘business as usual’ is 
still a  choice, which in addition to the obvious geophysical risks, 
involves not making the best use of new technologies, risks of 
future stranded assets, greater local pollution, and multiple other 
environmental threats.
The dimensions as listed provide a  basis for this assessment both 
in the sectoral chapters (6–11), providing a common framework for 
cross-sectoral assessment detailed further in Chapter 12, and in the 
evaluation of global pathways (Section 3.2). More specific indicators 
under each of these dimensions offer consistency in assessing the 
challenges, choices, and enabling requirements facing different 
aspects of mitigating climate change.
Figure 1.8 also illustrates variants on these dimensions appropriate 
for evaluating domestic and international policies (Chapters 13 and 
14). The SR1.5 (Section 4.4) also introduced a framework of ‘Enabling 
Conditions for systemic change’, which as illustrated also has key 
dimensions in common with those of our feasibility assessment. In 
AR6 these enabling conditions are applied particularly in the context 
of shifting development pathways (Chapter 4.4).
Some fundamental criteria may span across several dimensions. 
Most obviously, issues of ethics and equity are intrinsic to the 
economic, socio-cultural (values, including intergenerational justice) 
and institutional (e.g.,  procedural justice) dimensions. Geopolitical 
issues could also clearly involve several dimensions, for example, 
concerning the politics of international trade, finance and resource 
distribution (economic dimension); international versus nationalistic 
identity (socio-cultural); and multilateral governance (institutional).
In this report, chapters with a strong demand-side dimension also 
suggest a simple policy hierarchy, reflecting that avoiding wastage – 
demands superfluous to human needs and wants  – can carry 
benefits across multiple indicators. Consequently, Chapters 5 and 10 
organise key actions in a hierarchy of Avoid (unnecessary demand) – 
Shift (to less resource-intensive modes)  – Improve (technologies 
for existing modes), with a  closely-related policy hierarchy in 
Chapter 9 (buildings).Table 1.2 | Potential for net co-benefits arising from synergies and trade-offs, opportunities and risks.
Positives Negatives
Broadly known (e.g., air pollution, distributional). Synergies Trade-offs
Deep uncertainties (e.g., radical innovations). Opportunities Risks
Select options with maximum synergies, and foster 
and exploit opportunities.Ameliorate trade-offs (e.g., revenue redistribution), 
and minimise or allocate risks appropriately.
Net co-benefits from appropriate mitigation choices
1.8.2 Illustrations of Multi-dimensional Assessment: 
Lock-in, Policies and ‘Just Transition’
The rest of this section illustrates briefly how such multi-dimensional 
assessment, utilising the associated analytic frameworks, can shed 
light on a  few key issues which arise across many chapters of 
this assessment.
Carbon Lock-in. The continued rise of global emissions reflects in 
part the strongly path-dependent nature of socio-economic systems, 
which implies a historic tendency to ‘carbon lock-in’ (Unruh 2000). 
An interdisciplinary review (Seto et al. 2016) identifies a dozen main 
components organised into four types, across the relevant dimensions 
of assessment as summarised in Table 1.3.
Along with the long lifetime of various physical assets detailed 
in AR5, AR6 underlines the exceptional degree of path-dependence 
in urban systems (Chapter 8) and associated buildings (Chapter 9) 
and transport (Chapter 10) sectors, but it is a feature across almost 
all the major emitting sectors. The (typically expected) operating 
lifetimes of existing carbon-emitting assets would involve anticipated 
emissions (often but inaccurately called ‘committed’ emissions in the 
literature), substantially exceeding the remaining carbon budgets 
associated with 1.5°C pathways (Chapter  2.7). Ongoing GHG-
intensive investments, including those from basic industrialisation in 
poorer countries, are adding to this.

information failures; and co-benefits.The fact that investors anticipate a  level of fossil fuel use that is 
not compatible with severe climate constraints creates a clear risk 
of ‘stranded assets’ facing these investors (Box  6.2), and others 
who depend on them, which itself raises issues of equity. A multi-
dimensional/multi-framework assessment helps to explain why 
such investments have continued, even in rich countries, and the 
consequent risks, and the complexity of shifting such investments 
in all countries. It may also inform approaches that could exploit 
path-dependence in clean energy systems, if there is sufficient 
investment in building up the low-GHG industries, infrastructures 
and networks required.
Carbon pricing. Appraisal of policy instruments also requires such 
multi-dimensional assessment. Stern’s (2007) reference to climate 
change as ‘the greatest market failure in history’ highlights that 
damages inflicted by climate change are not properly costed in 
most economic decision-making. Economic perspectives emphasise 
the value of removing fossil fuel subsidies, and pricing emissions to 
‘internalise’ in economic decision-making the ‘external’ damages 
imposed by GHG emissions, and/or to meet agreed goals. Aggregate 
economic frameworks generally indicate carbon pricing (on principles 
which extend to other gases) as the most cost-effective way to 
reduce emissions, notwithstanding various market failures which 
complicate this logic.9 The High-Level Commission on carbon pricing 
(Stern and Stiglitz 2017) estimated an appropriate range as USD40–

level of carbon pricing implemented to date is far lower than this or Physical potentials; use of scarce 
(geo) physi cal resour ces; land use
Air qualit y; ecotoxicity; water
quant ity and qualit y; biodiversity
Financi al implications; employment 
effects and e conom ic growth
Simplicity; sca labilit y; maturity
and te chnol ogy readi ness
Political accept ance ; institutional  
capaci ty; coor dination across sectors 
and stakehol ders; legal  and 
adm inistrative capaci tyPublic accept ance ; effects on heal th
and well-bei ng; distributional  effectsPolicy packages including 
climate and deve lopm ent 
Finance  
Lifestyle and behavi our
norms and choices Technol ogy and 
innova tion 
Governance  and 
institutional  capaci ty Emissions and e nvironm ental
co-beneﬁ ts
Econom ic effectiveness
Distributional  effects 
Socio-cu ltural co-beneﬁ ts 
and other side effects Transf ormative potential 
Institutional  requi rementsFeasibility assessm ent
(Chapters 3, 6–12)Enab ling condi tions National and sub-national
Policy and In ternational
Cooper ation Assessm ent
(Chapters 13, 14)
Econom ic
Socio-cul tural
Institutional
and polit icalGeophysi cal
Environm ental
and ecol ogical
Technol ogical
including infrastructureDimen sions
Figure 1.8 | Feasibility and related dimensions of assessment.
than most economic analyses now recommend (Section 3.6.1), and 
nowhere is carbon pricing the only instrument deployed.
A socio-cultural and equity perspective emphasises that the faith in 
and role of markets varies widely between countries – many energy 
systems do not in fact operate on a basis of competitive markets – 
and that because market-based carbon pricing involves large revenue 
transfers, it must also contend with major distributional effects and 
political viability (Prinn et al. 2017; Klenert et al. 2018), both domestic 
(Chapter 13) and international (Chapter 14). A major review (Maestre-
Andrés et al. 2019) finds persistent distributional concerns (rich 
incumbents have also been vocal in using arguments about impacts 
on the poor (Rennkamp 2019)), but suggests these may be addressed 
by combining redistribution of revenues with support for low-carbon 
innovation. Measures could include redistributing the tax revenue to 
favour of low-income groups or differentiated carbon taxes (Metcalf 
2009; Klenert and Mattauch 2016; Stiglitz 2019), including ‘dual 
track’ approaches (van den Bergh et al. 2020). To an extent though, 
all these depend on levels of trust, and institutional capacity.
Technological and transitions perspectives in turn find carbon-
pricing incentives may only stimulate incremental improvements, 
but other instruments may be much more effective for driving 
deeper innovation and transitions (Chapters 14, 15 and 16), whilst 
psychological and behavioural studies emphasise many factors 
beyond only pricing (Sections  5.4.1 and 5.4.2). In practice, a  wide 
range of policy instruments are used (Chapter 13).
Finally, in economic theory, negotiations on a common carbon price 
(or other common policies) may have large benefits (less subject to 
‘free riding’) compared to a  focus on negotiating national targets 
(Cramton et al. 2017a). The fact that this has never even been 
seriously considered (outside some efforts in the EU) may reflect the 
exceptional sovereignty sensitivities around taxation and cultural 
differences around the role of markets. However, carbon-pricing 
concepts can be important outside of the traditional market (‘tax 
or trading’) applications. A  ’social cost of carbon’ can be used to evaluate government and regulatory decisions, to compensate for 
inadequate carbon prices in actual markets, and by companies to 
reflect the external damage of their emissions and strategic risks of 
future carbon controls (Zhou and Wen 2020). An agreed ‘social value 
of mitigation activities’ could form a basic index for underwriting risks 
in low-carbon investments internationally (Hourcade et al. 2021a).
Thus, practical assessment of carbon pricing inherently needs multi-
dimensional analysis. The realities of political economy and lobbying 
have to date severely limited the implementation of carbon pricing 
(Mildenberger 2020), leading some social scientists to ask ‘Can we 
price carbon?’ (Rabe 2018). Slowly growing adoption (World Bank 
2019) suggests ‘yes’, but only through complex evolution of efforts: 
a study of 66 implemented carbon-pricing policies show important 
effects of regional clustering, international processes, and seizing 
political windows of opportunity (Skovgaard et al. 2019).
Just Transitions. Finally, whilst ‘transition’ frameworks may 
explain potential dynamics that could transform systems, a  multi-
dimensional/multi-framework assessment underlines the motivation 
for Just Transitions (Sections 1.6.2.3 and 4.5). This can be defined as 
a transition from a high-carbon to a low-carbon economy which is 
considered sufficiently equitable for the affected individuals, workers, 
communities, sectors, regions and countries (Jasanoff 2018; Newell 
and Mulvaney 2013). As noted, sufficient equity is not only an ethical 
issue but an enabler of deeper ambition for accelerated mitigation 
(Klinsky and Winkler 2018; Urpelainen and Van de Graaf 2018; 
Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2019). Perception of fairness influences the 
effectiveness of cooperative action (Winkler et al. 2018), and this can 
apply to affected individuals, workers, communities, sectors, regions 
and countries (Newell and Mulvaney 2013; Jasanoff 2018).
A Just Transitions framing can also enable coalitions which integrate 
low-carbon transformations with concerns for climate adaptation 
(Patterson et al. 2018). All this explains the emergence of ‘Just 
Transition Commissions’ in several of the more ambitious developed 
countries and complex social packages for coal phase-out in Europe Table 1.3 | Carbon lock-in – types and key characteristics.  Source: adapted from Seto et al. (2016).
Lock-in type Key characteristics
Economic –Large investments with long lead times and sunk costs, made on the basis of anticipated use of resources, capital, and equipment to pay back the 
investment and generate profits.
 –Initial choices account for private but not social costs and benefits.
Socio-cultural, 
equity and behaviour –Lock-in through social structure (e.g., norms and social processes).
 –Lock-in through individual decision-making (e.g., psychological processes).
 –Single, calculated choices become a long string of non-calculated and self-reinforcing habits.
 –Interrupting habits is difficult but possible (e.g., family size, thermostat setting) to change.
 –Individuals and communities become dependent on the fossil fuel economy, meaning that change may have adverse distributional impacts.
Technology 
and infrastructure –Learning-by-doing and scale effects, including the cumulative nature of innovation, reinforces established technologies.
 –Interaction of technologies and networks (physical, organisational, financial) on which they depend.
 –Random, unintentional events including network and learning-effect final outcomes (e.g., lock-in to the QWERTY keyboard).
Institutional and political –Powerful economic, social, and political actors seek to reinforce the status quo that favours their interests.
 –Laws and Institutions, including regulatory structures, are designed to stabilise and lock-in a desired trajectory, and also to provide long-term 
predictability (socio-technical regimes in transition theories).
 –Beneficial and intended outcomes for some actors.
 –Not random chance but intentional choice (e.g., support for renewable electricity in Germany) can develop political consistencies that reinforce 
a direction of travel.
as reference to the concept in the PA and its emphasis in the Talanoa 
Dialogue and Silesia Declaration (Section 1.2.2).
Whilst the broad concepts of Just Transitions have roots going 
back decades, its specific realisation in relation to climate change 
is of course complex: Section  4.5 identifies at least eight distinct 
elements proposed in the literature, even before considering the 
international dimensions.
1.9 Governing Climate Change
Previous sections have highlighted the multiple factors that drive 
and constrain climate action, the complex interconnection between 
climate mitigation and other societal objectives, and the diversity 
of analytical frames for interpreting these connections. Despite 
the complexities, there are signs of progress including increased 
societal awareness, change in social attitudes, policy commitments 
by a  broad range of actors and sustained emission reductions in 
some jurisdictions. Nevertheless, emission trends at the global level 
remains incompatible with the goals agreed in the Paris Agreement. 
Fundamentally, the challenge of how best to urgently scale up and 
speed up the climate-mitigation effort at all scales – from local to 
global  – to the pace needed to address the climate challenge is 
that of governance understood as ‘modes and mechanisms to steer 
society’ (Jordan et al. 2015). The concept of governance encompasses 
the ability to plan and create the organisations needed to achieve 
a desired goal (Güney 2017) and the process of interaction among 
actors involved in a common problem for making and implementing 
decisions (Kooiman 2003; Hufty 2012).
Climate change governance has been projected as conscious 
transformation at unprecedented scale and speed involving 
a  contest of ideas and experimentation across scales of authority 
and jurisdiction (Hildén et al. 2017; Kivimaa et al. 2017; Laakso et al. 
2017; Gordon 2018; van der Heijden 2018). Yet, there remains a sense 
that achieving the urgent transition to a low-carbon, climate-resilient 
and sustainable world requires significant innovation in governance 
(Hoffmann 2011; Stevenson and Dryzek 2013; Aykut 2016).
Starting from an initial focus on multilateral agreements, climate 
change governance has long evolved into a  complex polycentric 
structure that spans from the global to national and sub-national 
levels, with ‘multiple parallel initiatives involving a range of actors at 
different levels of governance’ (Okereke et al. 2009) and relying on 
both formal and informal networks and policy channels (Bulkeley et al. 
2014; Jordan et al. 2015). At the international level, implementation 
of the Paris Agreement and the UNFCCC more broadly is proceeding 
in parallel with other activities in an increasingly diverse landscape 
of loosely coordinated institutions, constituting ‘regime complex’ 
(Keohane and Victor 2011), and new cooperative efforts demonstrate 
an evolution in the shifting authority given to actors at different 
levels of governance (Chan et al. 2018).
Multi-level governance has been used to highlight the notion that the 
processes involved in making and implementing decisions on climate change are no longer the exclusive preserve of government actors 
but rather involve a range of non-nation state actors such as cities, 
businesses, and civil society organisations (IPCC 2014a; Bäckstrand 
et al. 2017; Jordan et al. 2018) (Chapter 13, and Sections 13.3.1 and 
13.5.2). Increased multi-level participation of sub-national actors, 
along with a  diversity of other transnational and non-state actors 
has helped to facilitate increased awareness, experimentation, 
innovation, learning and achieving benefits at multiple scales. Multi-
level participation in governance systems can help to build coalitions 
to support climate change mitigation policies (Roberts et al. 2018) 
and fragmentation has the potential to take cooperative and even 
synergistic forms (Biermann et al. 2009).
However, there is no guarantee that multi-level governance can 
successfully deal with complex human-ecological systems (York 
et al. 2005; Biermann et al. 2017; Di Gregorio et al. 2019). Multi-
level governance can contribute to an extremely polarised discussion 
and policy blockage rather than enabling policy innovation (Fisher 
and Leifeld 2019). A fragmented governance landscape may lead to 
coordination and legitimacy gaps undermining the regime (Nasiritousi 
and Bäckstrand 2019). The realities of the ‘drivers and constraints’ 
detailed in Section 4, the ‘glocal’ nature of climate change, the divided 
authority in world politics, diverse preferences of public and private 
entities across the spectrum, and pervasive suspicions of free riding, 
imply the challenge as how to incrementally deepen cooperation in 
a polycentric global system, rather than seeking a single, integrated 
governance (Keohane and Victor 2016).
Crucially, climate governance takes place in the context of embedded 
power relations, operating in global, national and local contexts. 
Effective rules and institutions to govern climate change are more 
likely to emerge where and when power structures and interests 
favour action. However widespread and enduring cooperation can 
only be expected when the benefits outweigh the cost of cooperation 
and when the interests of key actors are sufficiently aligned (Barrett 
1994; Finus and Rübbelke 2008; Victor 2011; Mainali et al. 2018; 
Tulkens 2019). Investigating the distribution and role of hard and 
soft power resources, capacities and power relations within and 
across different jurisdictional levels is therefore important to uncover 
hindrances to effective climate governance (Marquardt 2017). 
Institutions at international and national levels are also critical as 
they have the ability to mediate the power and interest of actors, and 
sustain cooperation based on equity and fair rules and outcomes. 
Governance, in fact, helps to align and moderate the interests of 
actors as well as to shift perceptions, including the negative, burden-
sharing narratives that often accompany discussion about climate 
action, especially in international negotiations. It is also useful for 
engaging the wider public and international networks in imagining 
low-carbon societies (e.g.,  Levy and Spicer 2013; Milkoreit 2017; 
Nikoleris et al. 2017; Wapner and Elver 2017; Bengtsson Sonesson 
et al. 2019; Fatemi et al. 2020). Experimentation also represents an 
important source of governance innovation and capability formation, 
linked to global knowledge and technology flows, which could 
reshape emergent socio-technical regimes and so contribute to 
alternative development pathways (Berkhout et al. 2010; Roberts 
et al. 2018; Turnheim et al. 2018; Lo and Castán Broto 2019).
Global conditions have changed substantially since the IPCC’s Fifth 
Assessment Report in 2014. The Paris Agreement and the SDGs 
provided a new international context, but global intergovernmental 
cooperation has been under intense stress. Growing direct impacts 
of climate change are unambiguous and movements of protest and 
activism  – in countries and transnational organisations at many 
levels – have grown. Global emissions growth had slowed but not 
stopped up to 2018/19, albeit with more diverse national trends. 
Growing numbers of countries have adopted ‘net zero’ CO 2 and/
or GHG emission goals and decarbonisation or low-carbon growth 
strategies, but the current NDCs to 2030 collectively would barely 
reduce global emissions below present levels (Section  1.3.3). An 
unfolding technology revolution is making significant contributions 
in some countries, but as yet its global impact is limited. Global 
climate change can only be tackled within, and if integrated with, the 
wider context of sustainable development, and related social goals 
including equity concerns. Countries and their populations have 
many conflicting priorities. Developing countries in particular have 
multiple urgent needs associated with earlier stages of sustainable 
development as reflected in the non-climate SDGs. Developed 
countries are amongst the most unsustainable in terms of overall 
consumption, but also face social constraints particularly arising from 
distributional impacts of climate policies.
The assessment of the key drivers for, and barriers against mitigation 
undertaken in this chapter underscore the complexity and multi-
dimensional nature of climate mitigation. Historically, much of the 
academic analysis of mitigating climate change, particularly global 
approaches, has focused on modelling costs and pathways, and 
discussion about ‘optimal’ policy instruments. Developments since 
AR5 have continued to highlight the role of a wide range of factors 
intersecting the political, economic, social and institutional domains. 
Yet despite such complexities, there are signs of progress emerging 
from years of policy effort in terms of technology, social attitudes, 
and emission reductions in some countries, with tentative signs of 
impact on the trajectory of global emissions. The challenge remains 
how best to urgently scale up and speed up the climate mitigation 
effort at all scales – from local to global – to achieve the level of 
mitigation needed to address the problem as indicated by climate 
science. A related challenge is how to ensure that mitigation effort 
and any associated benefits of action are distributed fairly within and 
between countries and aligned to the overarching objective of global 
sustainable development. Lastly, globally effective and efficient 
mitigation will require international cooperation especially in the 
realms of finance and technology.
Multiple frameworks of analytic assessment, adapted to the 
realities of climate change mitigation, are therefore required. We 
identified four main groups. Aggregate economic frameworks  – 
including environmental costs or goals, and with due attention to 
implied behavioural, distributional and dynamic assumptions – can 
provide insights about trade-offs, cost-effectiveness and policies for 
delivering agreed goals. Ethical frameworks are equally essential 
to inform both international and domestic discourse and decisions, 
including the relationship with international (and intergenerational) responsibilities, related financial systems, and domestic policy design 
in all countries. Explicit frameworks for analysing transition and 
transformation across multiple sectors need to draw on both socio-
technical transition literatures, and those on social transformation. 
Finally, literatures on psychology, behaviour and political sciences 
can illuminate obstacles that have impeded progress to date and 
suggest ways to overcome them.
No single analytical framework, or single discipline, on its own can 
offer a  comprehensive assessment of climate change mitigation. 
Together they point to the relevance of growing literatures and 
discourses on Just Transitions, and the role of governance at multiple 
levels. Ultimately all these frameworks are needed to inform the 
decisions required to deepen and connect the scattered elements 
of progress to date, and hence accelerate progress towards agreed 
goals and multiple dimensions of climate change mitigation in the 
context of sustainable development.
1.11 Knowledge Gaps
Despite huge expansion in the literature (Callaghan et al. 2020), 
knowledge gaps remain. Modeling still struggles to bring together 
detailed physical and economic climate impacts and mitigation, 
with limited representation of financial and distributional dynamics. 
There are few interdisciplinary tools which apply theories of 
transition and transformation to questions of economic and social 
impacts, compounded by remaining uncertainties concerning the 
role of new technological sets, international instruments, policy and 
political evaluation.
One scan of future research needs suggests three priority areas (Roberts 
et al. 2020): (i) human welfare-focused development (e.g., reducing 
inequality); (ii) how the historic position of states within international 
power relations conditions their ability to respond to climate change; 
(iii) transition dynamics and the flexibility of institutions to drive 
towards low-carbon development pathways. There remain gaps in 
understanding how international dynamics and agreements filter 
down to affect constituencies and local implementation. Literature 
on the potential for supply-side agreements, in which producers 
agree to restrict the supply of fossil fuels (e.g., Asheim et al. 2019) is 
limited but gaining increasing academic attention.
Nature is under pressure both at land and at sea, as demonstrated by 
declining biodiversity (IPBES 2019). Climate policies could increase 
the pressure on land and oceans (IPCC 2019c,b), with insufficient 
attention to relationships between biodiversity and climate 
agreements and associated policies. IPBES aims to coordinate with 
the IPCC more directly, but literature will be required to support 
these reports.
Compounding these gaps is the fact that socially oriented, agriculture-
related options, where human and non-human systems intersect most 
obviously, remain under-researched (e.g., Balasubramanya and Stifel 
2020). Efforts to engage with policies here, especially framed around 
ecosystem services, have often neglected their ‘practical fitness’ in 
addressed in future research (Stevenson et al. 2021).
The relative roles of short-term mitigation policies and long-term 
investments, including government and financial decision-making 
tools, remains inadequately explored. Strategic investments may 
include city planning, public transport, EV-charging networks, and 
CCU/CCS.  Understanding how international treaties can increase 
incentives to make such investments is all the more salient in the 
aftermath of COVID-19, on which research is necessarily young but 
rapidly growing. Finally, the economic, institutional and political 
strategies to close the gap between NDCs, actual implementation, 
and mitigation goals – informed by the PA and the UNFCCC Global 
Stocktake – require much further research.
1.12 Roadmap to the Report
This Sixth Assessment Report covers mitigation in five main parts 
(Figure 1.9), namely: introduction and frameworks; emission trends, 
scenarios and pathways; sectors; institutional dimensions including 
national and international policy, financial and technological 
mitigation drivers; and conclusions.
Chapters 2 to 5 cover the big picture trends, drivers and projections 
at national and global levels. Chapter  2  analyses emission trends 
and drivers to date. Chapter 3 presents long-term global scenarios, 
including the projected economic and other characteristics of 
mitigation through to the balancing of sources and sinks through 
the second half of this century, and the implications for global 
temperature change and risks. Chapter 4 explores the shorter-term 
prospects including NDCs, and the possibilities for accelerating 
mitigation out to 2050 in the context of sustainable development 
at the national, regional and international scales. Chapter 5, a new 
chapter for IPCC Assessments, focuses upon the role of services and 
derived demand for energy and land use, and the social dimensions.
Chapters 6 to 12 examine sectoral contributions and possibilities for 
mitigation. Chapter 6 summarises characteristics and trends in the 
energy sector, specifically supply, including the remarkable changes 
in the cost of some key technologies since AR5. Chapter 7 examines 
the roles of AFOLU, drawing upon and updating the recent Special 
Report, including the potential tensions between the multiple 
uses of land. Chapter  8  presents a  holistic view of the trends 
and pressures of  urban systems, as both a  challenge and an 
opportunity for mitigation. Chapters  9 and 10 then examine two 
sectors which entwine with, but go well beyond, urban systems: 
buildings (Chapter  9) including construction materials and zero-
carbon buildings; and transport (Chapter  10), including shipping 
and aviation and a  wider look at mobility as a  general service. 
Chapter  11 explores the contribution of industry, including supply 
chain developments, resource efficiency/circular economy, and the 
cross-system implications of decarbonisation for industrial systems. 
Finally, Chapter 12 takes a cross-sectoral perspective and explores 
cross-cutting issues like the interactions of biomass energy, food and 
land, and carbon dioxide removal.Four chapters then review thematic issues in implementation and 
governance of mitigation. Chapter  13 explores national and sub-
national policies and institutions, bringing together lessons of policies 
examined in the sectoral chapters, as well as insights from service 
and demand-side perspectives (Chapter 5), along with governance 
approaches and capacity-building, and the role and relationships of 
sub-national actors. Chapter 14 then considers the roles and status 
of international cooperation, including the UNFCCC agreements 
and international institutions, sectoral agreements and multiple 
forms of international partnerships, and the ethics and governance 
challenges of solar radiation modification. Chapter  15 explores 
investment and finance, including current trends, the investment 
needs for deep decarbonisation, and the complementary roles of 
public and private finance. This includes climate-related investment 
opportunities and risks (e.g.,  ‘stranded assets’), linkages between 
finance and investments in adaptation and mitigation; and the 
impact of COVID-19. A new chapter on innovation (Chapter 16) looks 
at technology development, accelerated deployment and global 
diffusion as systemic issues that hold potential for transformative 
changes, and the challenges of managing such changes at multiple 
levels including the role of international cooperation.
Finally, Chapter  17 considers accelerating the transition in the 
context of sustainable development, including practical pathways 
for joint responses to climate change and sustainable development 
challenges. This includes major regional perspectives, mitigation-
adaptation interlinkages, and enabling conditions including the roles 
of technology, finance and cooperation for sustainable development.
IPCC
AR6
WGIIIChapter 1
Introduction and framingChapter 17
Accelerating the transition
in the context of
sustainable development
Chapters 13–16
Institutional national,
sub-national
and international
ﬁnancial and
technological
driversChapters 2–5
Emissions trends,
drivers and
pathways
Chapters 6–12
Sectors
(Energy, Agriculture/forestry/land,
Urban systems, Buildings, Transport,
Industry, and Cross-sectoral perspectives)
Figure 1.9 | The structure of the AR6 mitigation report.