
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Executive Summary
Long-term deep emission reductions, including the reduction 
of emissions to net zero, is best achieved through institutions 
and governance that nurture new mitigation policies, 
while at the same time reconsidering existing policies that 
support continued Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions (robust 
evidence, high agreement). To do so effectively, the scope of 
climate governance should include both direct efforts to target GHG 
emissions and indirect opportunities to tackle GHG emissions that 
result from efforts directed towards other policy objectives. {13.2, 
13.5, 13.6, 13.7, 13.9} 
Institutions and governance underpin mitigation by providing 
the legal basis for action. This includes setting up implementing 
organisations and the frameworks through which diverse 
actors interact (medium evidence, high agreement). Institutions 
can create mitigation and sectoral policy instruments; policy packages 
for low-carbon system transition; and economy-wide measures for 
systemic restructuring. {13.2, 13.7, 13.9}
Policies have had a  discernible impact on mitigation for 
specific countries, sectors, and technologies (robust evidence, 
high agreement), avoiding emissions of several GtCO2-eq yr–1 
(medium evidence, medium agreement). Both market-based and 
regulatory policies have distinct, but complementary roles. The share 
of global GHG emissions subject to mitigation policy has increased 
rapidly in recent years, but big gaps remain in policy coverage, and the 
stringency of many policies falls short of what is needed to achieve 
strong mitigation outcomes (robust evidence, high agreement). {13.6, 
Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 14}
Climate laws enable mitigation action by signalling the 
direction of travel, setting targets, mainstreaming mitigation 
into sector policies, enhancing regulatory certainty, creating 
law-backed agencies, creating focal points for social 
mobilisation, and attracting international finance (medium 
evidence, high agreement). By 2020, ‘direct’ climate laws primarily 
focused on GHG reductions were present in 56 countries covering 
53% of global emissions, while more than 690 laws, including 
‘indirect’ laws, may also have an effect on mitigation. Among direct 
laws, ‘framework’ laws set an overarching legal basis for mitigation 
either by pursuing a  target and implementation approach, or by 
seeking to mainstream climate objectives through sectoral plans and 
integrative institutions. {13.2}
Institutions can enable improved governance by coordinating 
across sectors, scales and actors, building consensus for 
action, and setting strategies (medium evidence, high 
agreement). Institutions are more stable and effective when they 
are congruous with national context, leading to mitigation-focused 
institutions in some countries and the pursuit of multiple objectives 
in others. Sub-national institutions play a  complementary role to 
national institutions by developing locally-relevant visions and plans, 
addressing policy gaps or limits in national institutions, building 
local administrative structures and convening actors for place-based 
decarbonisation. {13.2}Sub-national actors are important for mitigation because 
municipalities and regional governments have jurisdiction 
over climate-relevant sectors such as land-use, waste and 
urban policy; are able to experiment with climate solutions; 
and can forge partnerships with the private sector and 
internationally to leverage enhanced climate action (robust 
evidence, high agreement). More than 10,500 cities and nearly 

largely voluntary action to reduce emissions. Indirect gains include 
innovation, establishing norms and developing capacity. However, 
sub-national actors often lack national support, funding, and 
capacity to mobilise finance and human resources, and create new 
institutional competences. {13.5}
Climate governance is constrained and enabled by domestic 
structural factors, but it is still possible for actors to make 
substantial changes (medium evidence, high agreement). 
Key structural factors are domestic material endowments (such as 
fossil fuels and land-based resources); domestic political systems; 
and prevalent ideas, values and belief systems. Developing countries 
face additional material constraints in climate governance due to 
development challenges and scarce economic or natural resources. 
a broad group of actors influence how climate governance develop 
over time, including a  range of civic organisations, encompassing 
both pro-and anti-climate action groups. {13.3, 13.4}
Mitigation strategies, instruments and policies that fit with 
dominant ideas, values and belief systems within a  country 
or within a sector are more easily adopted and implemented 
(medium evidence, medium agreement). Ideas, values and beliefs 
may change over time. Policies that bring perceived direct benefits, 
such as subsidies, usually receive greater support. The awareness of 
co-benefits for the public increases support of climate policies (robust 
evidence, high agreement). {13.2, 13.3, 13.4}
Climate litigation is growing and can affect the outcome 
and ambition of climate governance (medium evidence, high 
agreement). Since 2015, at least 37 systemic cases have been 
initiated against states that challenge the overall effort of a  state 
to mitigate or adapt to climate change. If successful, such cases 
can lead to an increase in a  country’s overall ambition to tackle 
climate change. Climate litigation has also successfully challenged 
governments’ authorisations of high-emitting projects setting 
precedents in favour of climate action. Climate litigation against 
private sector and financial institutions is also on the rise. {13.4}
The media shapes the public discourse about climate 
mitigation.  This can usefully build public support to 
accelerate mitigation action, but may also be used to impede 
decarbonisation (medium evidence, high agreement). Global 
media coverage (across a study of 59 countries) has been growing, 
from about 47,000  stories in 2016–2017 to about 87,000 in 
2020–2021. Generally, the media representation of climate science 
has increased and become more accurate over time. On occasion, 
the propagation of scientifically misleading information by organised 
counter-movements has fuelled polarisation, with negative 
implications for climate policy. {13.4}
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Explicit attention to equity and justice is salient to both social 
acceptance and fair and effective policymaking for mitigation 
(robust evidence, high agreement). Distributional implications of 
alternative climate policy choices can be usefully evaluated at city, 
local and national scales as an input to policymaking. Institutions 
and governance frameworks that enable consideration of justice 
and just transitions are likely to build broader support for climate 
policymaking. {13.2, 13.6, 13.8, 13.9}
Carbon pricing is effective in promoting implementation 
of low-cost emissions reductions (robust evidence, high 
agreement). While the coverage of emissions trading and carbon 
taxes has risen to over 20% of global CO 2 emissions, both coverage 
and price are lower than is needed for deep reductions. The design of 
market mechanisms should be effective as well as efficient, balance 
distributional goals and find social acceptance. Practical experience 
has driven progress in market mechanism design, especially of 
emissions trading schemes (robust evidence, high agreement). 
Carbon pricing is limited in its effect on adoption of higher-cost 
mitigation options, and where decisions are often not sensitive to 
price incentives such as in energy efficiency, urban planning, and 
infrastructure (robust evidence, medium agreement). Subsidies have 
been used to improve energy efficiency, encourage the uptake of 
renewable energy and other sector-specific emissions saving options 
(robust evidence, high agreement). {13.6}
Regulatory instruments play an important role in achieving 
specific mitigation outcomes in sectoral applications (robust 
evidence,  high agreement) . Regulation is effective in particular 
applications and often enjoys greater political support, but tends to be 
more economically costly, than pricing instruments (robust evidence, 
medium agreement) . Flexible forms of regulation (for example, 
performance standards) have achieved aggregate goals for renewable 
energy generation, vehicle efficiency and fuel standards, and energy 
efficiency in buildings and industry (robust evidence,  high agreement). 
Infrastructure investment decisions are significant for mitigation 
because they lock-in high- or low- emissions trajectories over long 
periods. Information and voluntary programmes can contribute to 
overall mitigation outcomes (medium evidence,  high agreement) . 
Designing for overlap and interactions among mitigation policies 
enhances their effectiveness (robust evidence,  high agreement). {13.6}
Removing fossil fuel subsidies would reduce emissions, improve 
public revenue and macroeconomic performance, and yield 
other environmental and sustainable development benefits; 
subsidy removal may have adverse distributional impacts especially on 
the most economically vulnerable groups which, in some cases can 
be mitigated by measures such as redistributing revenue saved, all 
of which depend on national circumstances (high confidence); fossil 
fuel subsidy removal is projected by various studies (using alternative 
methodologies) to reduce global CO 2 emissions by 1–4%, and GHG 
emissions by up to 10% by 2030, varying across regions (medium 
confidence). {6.3, 13.6}
National mitigation policies interact internationally with 
effects that both support and hinder mitigation action 
(medium evidence, high agreement). Reductions in demand for 
fossil fuels tend to negatively affect fossil fuel exporting countries (medium evidence, high agreement). Creation of markets for emission 
reduction credits tends to benefit countries able to supply credits. 
Policies to support technology development and diffusion tend to 
have positive spillover effects (medium evidence, high agreement). 
There is no consistent evidence of significant emissions leakage or 
competitiveness effects between countries, including for emissions-
intensive trade-exposed industries covered by emission trading 
systems (medium evidence, medium agreement). {13.6}
Policy packages are better able to support socio-technical 
transitions and shifts in development pathways toward low-
carbon futures than are individual policies (robust evidence, 
high agreement). For best effect, they need to be harnessed to 
a  clear vision for change and designed with attention to local 
governance context. Comprehensiveness in coverage, coherence 
to ensure complementarity, and consistency of policies with the 
overarching vision and its objectives are important design criteria. 
Integration across objectives occurs when a  policy package is 
informed by a  clear problem framing and identification of the full 
range relevant policy sub-systems. {13.7}
The co-benefits and trade-offs of integrating adaptation and 
mitigation are most usefully identified and assessed prior 
to policy making rather than being accidentally discovered 
(robust evidence, high agreement). This requires strengthening 
relevant national institutions to reduce silos and overlaps, increasing 
knowledge exchange at the country and regional levels, and 
supporting engagement with bilateral and multilateral funding 
partners. Local governments are well placed to develop policies that 
generate social and environmental co-benefits but to do so require 
legal backing and adequate capacity and resources. {13.8}
Climate change mitigation is accelerated when attention 
is  given to integrated policy and economy-wide approaches, and 
when enabling conditions (governance, institutions, behaviour, 
innovation, policy, and finance), are present (robust evidence, 
medium agreement). Accelerating climate mitigation includes 
simultaneously weakening high carbon systems and encouraging 
low-carbon systems; ensuring interaction between adjacent systems 
(e.g. energy and agriculture); overcoming resistance to policies 
(e.g., from incumbents in high carbon emitting industries), including 
by providing transitional support to the vulnerable and negatively 
affected by distributional impacts; inducing changes in consumer 
practices and routines; providing transition support; and addressing 
coordination challenges in policy and governance. {13.7, 13.9}
Economy-wide packages, including economic stimulus 
packages, can contribute to shifting sustainable development 
pathways and achieving net zero outcomes while meeting 
short term economic goals (medium evidence, high 
agreement). The 2008–2009 Global Recession showed that 
policies for sustained economic recovery go beyond short-term fiscal 
stimulus to include long-term commitments of public spending on 
the low-carbon economy; pricing reform; addressing affordability; 
and minimising distributional impacts. COVID-19 spurred stimulus 
packages and multi-objective recovery policies that may have the 
potential to meet short-term economic goals while enabling longer-
term sustainability goals. {13.9}
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions1313.1 Introduction 
This chapter assesses national and sub-national policies and 
institutions. Given the scale and scope of the climate challenge, 
an immediate challenge for this assessment is defining its scope. 
Because a  very wide range of institutions and policies at multiple 
scales carry implications for climate change, the approach followed 
here is to embrace a broad approach. Consequently, institutions and 
policies discussed include dedicated climate laws and organisations 
(Section  13.2) and direct mitigation policies such as carbon taxes 
(Section 13.6), but also those, such as sectoral ministries and their 
policies (Sections  13.6 and 13.7) and sub-national entities such 
as regional bodies, cities, and their policies (Section  13.5), the 
implications of which are salient to mitigation outcomes. This approach 
recognises that there are important linkages with international 
climate governance (Chapter 14), notably the role of internationally 
mandated Nationally Determined Contributions’ in stimulating 
domestic policy development (Section 13.2), transnational networks 
in spurring sub-national action (Section  13.5), and international 
effects of domestic policies (Section 13.6).
This encompassing approach to climate governance is also built on 
a  recognition that climate policymaking is routinely formulated in 
the context of multiple policy objectives such as energy security, 
energy access, urban development, and mitigation-adaptation 
linkages. This informs policymaking based on an understanding that 
to fully maximise direct and indirect climate mitigation potential, 
maximising co-benefits and minimising trade-offs should be explicitly 
sought rather than accidentally discovered and policies designed 
accordingly. This understanding also informs the design of institutions 
(Section 13.2) and policies (Sections 13.6 and 13.7) as well as the 
linkage between mitigation and adaptation (Section 13.8).
The chapter also engages with several new developments and an 
expansion of the literature since AR5. 
A growing literature assesses how national policymaking on climate 
mitigation is dependent on national politics around, and building 
consensus on, climate action. This, in turn, is shaped by both 
nationally specific structural features (Section 13.3) and the role of 
different actors in the policymaking process (Section 13.4). Important 
new avenues through which climate policy making is shaped, such 
as climate litigation (Section 13.4.2), and channels for public opinion 
formation, such as the media (Section 13.4.3) are also assessed. The 
chapter weaves discussions of the role of justice, understood through 
a discussion of procedural justice (Section 13.2), distributional justice 
(Section 13.6) and vulnerability (Section 13.8), and its role in creating 
public support for climate action (Section 13.9).
A significant new theme is the focus on the dynamic elements of policy 
making, that is, how policy can be designed to accelerate mitigation. 
This includes through technological transitions, socio-technical 
transitions, shifts in development pathways and economy-wide 
measures. This literature emphasises the importance of examining 
not just individual policies, but packages of policies (Section 13.7) 
and how these are enabled by the alignment of policy, institutions, 
finance, behaviour and innovation (Section  13.9). Also new is attention to the opportunities for economy-wide system change 
presented by consideration of post-COVID recovery packages, and 
wider efforts at sustainable economic restructuring (Section  13.9). 
Consistent with the discussion in Chapter 4, these larger approaches 
offer opportunities to undertake systemic restructuring and shift 
development pathways.
Finally, the chapter addresses core themes from earlier assessment 
reports, but seeks to do so in an enhanced manner. The discussion of 
climate institutions assesses a growing literature on climate law, as 
well as both purpose-built climate organisations and the layering of 
climate responsibilities on existing organisations at national and sub-
national scales (Section 13.2). The discussion of policies focuses on 
an ex post assessment of policies, as well as the interaction among 
them, and learnings on how they can be combined in packages 
(Sections  13.6 and 13.7). It also lays out a  framework for their 
assessment that encompasses environmental effectiveness, economic 
effectiveness, distributional outcomes, co-benefits, institutional 
requirements, as well as a new criterion of transformational potential 
(Section 13.6). 
The aim of this chapter is to assess the full range of the multi-stranded 
and diverse literature on climate institutions and policy, reflecting the 
richness of real-world climate governance.
13.2 National and Sub-national 
Institutions and Governance
Institutions and governance arrangements can help address ‘policy 
gaps’ and ‘implementation gaps’ (Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 4) 
that hinder climate mitigation. While the need for institutions and 
governance is universal, individual country approaches vary, based on 
national approaches and circumstances, as discussed in this section. 
Since AR5, the understanding of climate governance has become 
more encompassing and complex, involving multiple actors, decision-
making arenas, levels of decision-making and a variety of political 
goals. Climate governance sometime directly targets GHG emissions; 
at other times mitigation results from measures that primarily aim 
to solve other issues, for instance relating to food production, forest 
management, energy markets, air pollution, transport systems or 
technology development, but with mitigation or adaptation effects 
(Karlsson et al. 2020). 
Consistent with usage in this assessment, institutions are rules, norms 
and conventions that guide, constrain or enable behaviours and 
practices, including the organisations through which they operate, 
while governance is the structure, processes and actions that public 
and private actors use to address societal goals (See Glossary for 
complete definitions). Multiple terms are used in the literature to 
discuss climate governance, often varying across countries. Climate 
laws, or legislation, is passed by legislatures, and often sets the 
overarching governance context, but the term is also used to refer 
to legislation that is salient to climate outcomes even if not centrally 
focused on climate change. National strategies, often referred to as 
plans, most often operate through executive action by government, 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
set guidance for action and often are not legally binding, although 
strategies may also be enshrined in law. Both laws and strategies 
may elaborate targets, or goals, for emissions outcomes, although 
these are not necessary components of laws and strategies. While 
laws typically operate at the national level (states may also make 
laws in federal nations), strategies, plans and targets may also 
operate at the sub-national level.
This section begins with a  discussion of national laws for climate 
action (Section  13.2.1), followed by a  discussion of national 
strategies (Section  13.2.2). The third section examines institutions 
(Section13.2.3), including organisations that are established to 
govern climate actions, and the final section explores sub-national 
institutions and their challenges in influencing climate mitigation 
(Section 13.2.4). 
13.2.1 Climate Laws
National laws that govern climate action often set the legal basis for 
climate action (Averchenkova et al. 2021). This legal basis can serve 
several functions: establish a platform for transparent target setting 
and implementation (Bennett 2018); provide a  signal to actors by 
indicating intent to harness state authority behind climate action 
(Scotford and Minas 2019); promise enhanced regulatory certainty 
(Scotford et al. 2017); create law-backed agencies for coordination, 
compliance and accountability (Scotford and Minas 2019); provide 
a  basis for mainstreaming mitigation into sector action, and 
create focal points for social mobilisation (medium evidence, high 
agreement) (Dubash et al. 2013). For lower/middle income countries, 
in particular, the existence of a  law may also attract international 
finance by serving as a signal of credibility (Fisher et al. 2017). The 
realisation of these potential governance gains depends on local 
context, legal design, successful implementation, and complementary 
action at different scales.
There are both narrow and broad definitions of what counts as 
‘climate laws’. The literature distinguishes direct climate laws that 
explicitly considers climate change causes or impacts – for example 
through mention of greenhouse gas reductions in its objectives 
or title (Dubash et al. 2013)  – from indirect laws that have ‘the 
capacity to affect mitigation or adaptation’ through the subjects they 
regulate, for example, through promotion of co-benefits, or creation 
of reporting protocols (Scotford and Minas 2019). Closely related is 
a ‘sectoral approach’ based on the layering of climate considerations 
into existing laws in the absence of an overarching framework 
law (Rumble 2019). Many countries also adopt executive climate 
strategies (discussed in Section  13.2), which may either coexist 
with or substitute for climate laws, and that may also be related to 
a country’s NDC process under the Paris Agreement. 
The prevalence of both direct and indirect climate laws has increased 
considerably since 2007, although definitional differences across 
studies complicate a  clear assessment of their relative importance 
(medium evidence, high agreement) (Iacobuta et al. 2018; Nachmany 

limitation as a direct objective – had been passed in 56 countries 
(of 194 studied) covering 53% of emissions in 2020, with most of 
that rise happening between 2010 and 2015 (Figure  13.1). Both 
direct and indirect laws – those that have an effect on mitigation 
even if this is not the primary outcome – is most closely captured by 
the ‘Climate Change Laws of the World’ database, which illustrates 
the same trend of growing prevalence, documenting 694 mitigation-
related laws by 2020 versus 558 in 2015 and 342 in 2010 (Nachmany 
and Setzer 2018; LSE Grantham Research Institute on Climate 
Change and the Environment 2021).1 Among these, the majority 
are accounted for by sectoral indirect laws. For example, a study of 
Commonwealth countries finds that a  majority of these countries 
have not taken the route of a single overarching law, but rather have 
an array of laws across different areas, for example, Indian laws on 
energy efficiency and Ghana’s laws on renewable energy promotion 
(Scotford et al. 2017).
Some direct climate laws may serve as ‘framework’ laws 
(Averchenkova et al. 2017; Rumble 2019) that set an overarching 
legal context within which other legislation and policies operate. 
Framework laws are intended to provide a  coherent legal basis 
for action, to integrate past legislation in related areas, set clear 
directions for future policy, and create necessary processes and 
institutions (medium evidence, medium agreement) (Townshend 
et al. 2013; Averchenkova et al. 2017; Fankhauser et al. 2018; Rumble 
2019; Averchenkova et al. 2021). There are a variety of approaches to 
framework laws. Reviews of climate legislation, many of which draw 
particularly from the long-standing UK Climate Change Act, suggest 
the need for statutory targets with a  long-term direction, shorter 
term instruments such as carbon budgets to induce action toward 
targets, a clear assignment of duties and responsibilities including 
identification of policies and responsibility for their implementation, 
annual reporting to Parliament; an independent body to support 
evidence-based decision-making and rules to govern information 
collection and provision (Barton and Campion 2018; Fankhauser 
et al. 2018; Abraham-Dukuma et al. 2020; Averchenkova et al. 2021). 
However, country examples also suggest other, different approaches 
to framework laws. Korea’s Framework Act on Low Carbon, 
Green Growth seeks to shift business and society toward green 
growth through a  process of strategy setting and action plans 
(Jang et al. 2010). Kenya’s framework Climate Change Act creates 
an institutional structure to mainstream climate considerations into 
sectoral decisions, one of several examples across Africa of efforts 
to create framework legislation to promote mainstreaming (Rumble 
2019). Mexico’s General Law on Climate Change includes sectoral 
emission targets, along with the creation of coordinating institutions 
across ministries and sub-national authorities (Averchenkova and 
Guzman Luna 2018). Consequently, different countries have placed 
emphasis on different aspects of framework laws, although the most 
widely prevalent approach is that exemplified by the UK. 
Climate laws spread through multiple mechanisms, including the 
impetus provided by international negotiation events, diffusion by 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions130510152025

DEV APC EEA AFR LAM MDEGHG emissions coverage (GtCO 2-eq)
20%49%52%80%51%48%

GlobalGHG emissions coverage (GtCO 2-eq)(a)
Climate legislation in force No climate legislation0

DEV APC EEA AFR LAM MDENumber of countries
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%

Global% countries(b)
No climate legislation102030405060
Figure 13.1 | Prevalence of legislation by emissions and number of countries across regions.  Top: Shares of global GHG emissions under national climate change 
legislations – in 2010, 2015 and 2020. Emissions data used are for 2019, since emissions shares across regions deviated from past patterns in 2020 due to COVID.  Bottom: 
Number of countries with national climate legislation – in 2010, 2015, and 2020. Climate legislation is defined as an act passed by a parliament that includes in its title or 
objectives reductions in GHGs. AR6 regions: DEV = Developed countries; APC = Asia and Pacific; EEA = Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia; AFR = Africa; LAM = Latin 
America and the Caribbean; MDE = Middle East. Source: updated and adapted with permission from Iacobuta et al. (2018) to reflect AR6 regional aggregation and recent data.
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
example across countries, and domestic factors such as business 
cycles (medium evidence, medium agreement). Major landmark 
events under the UNFCCC have been associated with increases 
in  national legislation (Iacobuta et al. 2018), with a  stronger 
effect in countries where international commitments are binding 
(Fankhauser et al. 2016). Diffusion through example of legislation 
from other countries has been documented (Fankhauser et al. 2016; 
Fleig et al. 2017; Torney 2017; Inderberg 2019; Torney 2019). For 
example, the UK Climate Change Act was an important influence 
in pursuing similar acts in Finland and Ireland (Torney 2019) and 
was also considered in the formulation of Mexico’s General Law 
on Climate Change (Averchenkova and Guzman Luna 2018). The 
presence of a framework law is positively associated with creation of 
additional supportive legislation (Fankhauser et al. 2015). Domestic 
contextual factors can also affect the likelihood of legislation such 
as a weak business cycle that can impact the political willingness to 
pass legislation (Fankhauser et al. 2015). In some cases, civil society 
groups play a  role as advocates for legislation, as occurred in the 
UK (Lockwood 2013; Lorenzoni and Benson 2014; Carter and Childs 
2018; Devaney et al. 2020) and in Germany in the build up to passage 
of their respective Climate Change Act (Flachsland and Levi 2021).
The performance of framework laws suggests a mixed picture. While 
the structure of the UK Act successfully sets a  direction of travel 
and has resulted in a  credible independent body, it performs less 
well in fostering integration across sectoral areas and providing an 
enforcement mechanism (Averchenkova et al. 2021). a  review of 
seven European climate change acts concludes that overall targets 
may not be entirely aligned with planning, reporting and evaluation 
mechanisms, and that sanction mechanisms are lacking across the 
board (Nash and Steurer 2019), which limit the scope for legislation 
to perform its integrative task. These observations suggest the need 
for careful attention to the design of framework laws.
There is extremely limited evidence on the aggregate effects of 
climate laws on climate outcomes, although there is a  broader 
literature assessing climate policies (Section  13.6 in this chapter 
and Cross-Chapter Box  10 in Chapter  14). a  single assessment of 
direct and indirect climate laws as well as relevant executive action 
across a  global database finds a  measurable and positive effect: 
global annual emissions have reduced by about 5.9 CO 2 compared 
to an estimation of what they otherwise would have been (Eskander 
and Fankhauser 2020). Climate laws require further research, 
including on the quantification of impact, framework versus sectoral 
approaches, and the various mechanisms through which laws act – 
target setting, creating institutional structures, mainstreaming and 
ensuring compliance. 
13.2.2 National Strategies and Nationally 
Determined Contributions
National climate strategies, which are often formulated through 
executive action, contribute to climate governance in several ways. 
Strategies enable discussion of low-emissions pathways while 
accounting for uncertainty, national circumstances and socio-
economic objectives (Falduto and Rocha 2020). They frequently set out long term emission goals and possible 
trajectories over time, with analysis of technological and economic 
factors (Levin et al. 2018; WRI 2020). This can include quantitative 
modelling of low-emissions transitions and their economic effects 
to inform policymakers and stakeholders of potential outcomes 
(Waisman et al. 2019; Weitzel et al. 2019). Scenario analysis can be 
used to explore how to make strategies more robust in the face of 
uncertainty (Sato and Altamirano 2019). Strategies and their regular 
revision can support long-term structural change by stimulating 
deliberation and learning (Voß et al. 2009), and to make the link 
between mitigation and adaptation objectives and actions (Watkiss 
and Klein 2019; Hans et al. 2020). As part of the Paris Agreement 
process, several countries have prepared and submitted long-term 
low-emissions development strategies (Levin et al. 2018), while 
others have different forms of national climate change strategies 
independently of the UNFCCC process. Strategies set over time by 
the European Union are discussed in Box 13.1.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) prepared under the 
Paris Agreement may be informed by national strategies (Rocha 
and Falduto 2019). But the process of preparing NDCs can itself 
raise political awareness, encourage institutional innovation 
and coordination, and engage stakeholders (Röser et al. 2020). 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) illustrate a diversity of 
approaches: direct mitigation targets, strategies, plans and actions 
for low-GHG emission development, or the pursuit of mitigation 
co-benefits resulting from economic diversification plans and/
or adaptation actions (UNFCCC Secretariat 2021). Figure  13.2 
shows that the prevalence of emission targets increased across all 
regions between 2010 and 2020, the period during which the Paris 
Agreement was reached. 
The NDCs vary in their scope, content and time frame, reflecting 
different national circumstances, and are widely heterogeneous 
in both stringency and coverage of mitigation efforts (UNFCCC 
Secretariat 2016, 2021; Pauw et al. 2018; Campagnolo and Davide 
2019; Pauw et al. 2019). The mitigation targets in the new or updated 
NDCs range from economy-wide absolute emission reduction targets 
to strategies, plans and actions for low-emission development, with 
specific time frames or implementation periods specified. Less than 
10% of parties’ NDCs specify when their emissions are expected 
to peak and some of these parties express their target as a carbon 
budget (UNFCCC Secretariat 2021). Many long-term strategies 
submitted by Parties to the UNFCCC refer to net zero emissions or 
climate neutrality, carbon neutrality, or GHG neutrality with reference 
to 2050, 2060 or mid-century targets (UNFCCC Secretariat 2021). The 
growing prevalence and coverage of emission targets is documented 
in Figure 13.2.
Almost all Parties outlined domestic mitigation measures as key 
instruments for achieving mitigation targets in specific priority areas 
such as energy supply (89%), transport (80%), buildings (72%), 
industry (39%), agriculture (67%), LULUCF (75%) and waste (68%). 
Renewable energy generation was the most frequently indicated 
mitigation option (84%), followed by improving energy efficiency 
of buildings (63%) and multi-sector energy efficiency improvement 
(48%); afforestation, reforestation and revegetation  (48%); 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions130102030405060

DEV APC EEA AFR LAM MDENumber of countries
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%

Global
Executive GHG emissions target No GHG emissions target Legislative GHG emissions target(b)0510152025

DEV APC EEA AFR LAM MDEGHG emissions coverage (GtCO 2-eq)

Global(a)
25%42%44%24%46%46% 51%12%10%
Figure 13.2 | Prevalence of targets by emissions and number of countries across region.  Top: Shares of global GHG emissions under national climate emission 
targets – in 2010, 2015 and 2020. Emissions data used are for 2019, since emissions shares across regions deviated from past patterns in 2020 due to COVID.  Bottom: Number 
of countries with national climate emission targets – in 2010, 2015, and 2020. Emissions reductions targets were taken into account as a legislative target when they were 
defined in a law or as part of a country’s submission under the Kyoto Protocol, or as an executive target when they were included in a national policy or official submissions 
under the UNFCCC. Targets were included if they were economy wide or included at least the energy sector. The proportion of national emissions covered are scaled to reflect 
coverage and whether targets are in GHG or CO 2 terms. AR6 regions: DEV = Developed countries; APC = Asia and Pacific; EEA = Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia; AFR 
= Africa; LAM = Latin America and the Caribbean; MDE = Middle East. Source: updated and adapted with permission from Iacobuta et al. (2018) to reflect AR6 regional 
aggregation and recent data.
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Box 13.1 | EU Climate Policy Portfolio and the European Green Deal
The European Union (EU)1 has developed an encompassing climate governance framework (Kulovesi and Oberthür 2020), having 
ratified the Kyoto Protocol in 2002. In 2003 the EU adopted an Emissions Trading System for sectors with large GHG emitters, which 
started in 2005. From 2007 to 2009, the EU revised its climate policies, including for vehicle emissions, renewable energy and energy 
efficiency, and adopted targets for 2020 for GHG emissions reductions, renewable energy shares and energy efficiency improvements. 
It also adopted in 2009 an Effort Sharing Decision for Member States’ emissions reductions for the period 2013–2020 in sectors not 
covered by the ETS (Boasson and Wettestad 2013; Bertoldi 2018). The ETS has been improved multiple times, including through a 2015 
Market Stability Reserve to reduce the surplus of emission allowances (Chaton et al. 2018; Wettestad and Jevnaker 2019). In 2010, the 
European Commission created a directorate-general (equal to a ministry at the domestic level) for Climate Action. Between 2014 and 
2018, the EU agreed on emission reduction targets for 2030 of 30% GHG emission reductions compared to 1990, and again revised 
its climate policy portfolio including new targets for renewable energies and energy efficiency and a new Effort Sharing Regulation 
(Fitch-Roy et al. 2019a; Oberthür 2019). 
From 2018, climate planning and reporting has been regulated by the EU Governance Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2018/1999), 
requiring member states to develop detailed and strategic National Energy and Climate Plans (Knodt et al. 2020). In 2019, the 
European Commission, backed by the European Council (heads of states and government in the EU) and the European Parliament, 
launched a new broad climate and environment initiative; the ‘European Green Deal’, implying the revision of many EU polices and 
introducing the Climate Pact (European Commission 2019a). This roadmap develops a ‘new growth strategy for the EU’ aimed at 
reaching climate neutrality by 2050 and spans multiple sectors. In 2020, the European Commission introduced a new climate law 
establishing the framework for achieving the climate neutrality by 2050 principle, and upgraded its 2030 GHG emission reduction 
target to at least net 55% reduction, which was adopted in June 2021 (European Commission 2020a). In June 2021, the new policy 
package ‘Fit for 55’ was adopted by the Commission; the packages included a proposal for the revision of the ETS, including its 
extension to shipping and a  separate emission trading system for road transport and buildings, a  revision of the effort sharing 
regulation, an amendment of the regulation setting CO 2 emission standards for cars and vans, a revision of the energy tax directive, 
a new carbon border adjustment mechanism, a revision of renewable energy and energy efficiency targets and directives, and a new 
social fund to make the transition to climate neutrality fair.

Secretariat 2021). Parties often communicated mitigation options 
related to the circular economy, including reducing waste (29%) 
and recycling waste (30%) and promoting circular economy (25%). 
Many Parties highlighted policy coherence and synergies between 
their mitigation measures and development priorities, which 
included long-term low-emission development strategy(LT-LEDS), 
the sustainable development goals (SDGs) and, for some, green 
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Some countries approach NDCs as an opportunity to integrate 
mitigation objectives and broader economic shifts or sectoral 
transformations (medium evidence, medium agreement). For 
example, Brazil’s 2016 NDC focussed on emissions from land-use 
change, including agricultural intensification, to align mitigation 
with a  national development strategy of halting deforestation 
in the Amazon, and increasing livestock production (De Oliveira 
Silva et al. 2018). While the forest sector accounts for the bulk of 
Madagascar’s mitigation potential, its NDC promotes GHG mitigation 
in both AFOLU and energy sectors to maximise co-benefits, and 
achieve a higher number of sustainable development goals (SDGs) 
(Nogueira et al. 2020). 13.2.3 Approaches to National Institutions 
and Governance 
13.2.3.1 The Forms of Climate Institutions
Universal ‘best-practice’ formulations of organisations may not be 
applicable across country contexts, but institutions that are suited 
to national context can be ratcheted up over time in their scope 
and effectiveness (medium evidence,  medium agreement). National 
climate institutions take diverse forms because they emerge out of 
country-specific interactions between national climate politics and 
existing institutional structures. Certain institutional forms tend to be 
common across countries, such as expert climate change commissions; 
a  review finds eleven such institutions in existence as of mid-2020. 
Although this institutional form may be common, these commissions 
vary in terms of expertise, independence and focus (Abraham-Dukuma 
et al. 2020), reinforcing the important shaping role of national context. 
A review of institutions in eight countries suggests three broad 
processes through which institutions emerge: ‘purpose-built’ 
dedicated institutions focused explicitly on mitigation; ‘layering’ of 
mitigation objectives on existing institutions; and ‘latent’ institutions 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13created for other purposes that nonetheless have implications for 
mitigation outcomes (Dubash 2021). In relatively few countries do 
new, purpose-built, legally-mandated bodies created specifically for 
climate mitigation exist although this number is growing; examples 
include the UK (Averchenkova et al. 2018), China (Teng and Wang 
2021), Australia (Keenan et al. 2012) and New Zealand (Timperley 
2020). These cases indicate that dedicated and lasting institutions 
with a  strategic long-term focus on mitigation emerge only under 
conditions of broad national political agreement around climate 
mitigation as a national priority (Dubash 2021). However, the specific 
forms of those institutions differ, as illustrated by the case of the UK’s 
Climate Change Committee established as an independent agency 
(Box  13.2) and China, which is built around a  top-down planning 
structure (Box 13.3).
Where economy-wide institutions do not exist, new institutions may 
still address sub-sets of the challenge. In Australia, while political 
conditions resulted in the repeal of an overarching Clean Energy 
Act in 2014, although a Climate Change Authority continued, other 
institutions primarily focused on the energy sector such as the Clean 
Energy Regulator, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, and the 
Australia Renewable Agency continued to shape energy outcomes 
(MacNeil 2021). Where new dedicated organisations have not emerged, countries 
may layer climate responsibilities on existing institutions; the 
addition of mitigation to the responsibilities of the US Environmental 
Protection Agency is an example (Mildenberger 2021). Layering 
is also a  common approach when climate change is embedded 
within consideration of multiple objectives of policy. In these cases, 
climate institutions tend to be layered on sectoral institutions for the 
pursuit of co-benefits or broader development concerns. Examples 
include India, where energy security was an important objective of 
renewable energy promotion policy (Pillai and Dubash 2021), Brazil’s 
mitigation approach focused on sectoral forest policy (Hochstetler 
2021) and South Africa’s emphasis on job creation as a necessary 
factor in mitigation policy (Chandrashekeran et al. 2017; Rennkamp 
2019). Prior to this process of layering, sectoral institutions, such as 
in forest and energy sectors, may play an important latent role in 
shaping climate outcomes, before climate considerations are part of 
their formal mandate.
New rules and organisations are not only created, they are also 
dismantled or allowed to wither away. Cases of institutional 
dismantling or neglect include the Australian Clean Energy Act 
(Crowley 2017; MacNeil 2021), the Indian Prime Minister’s Council 
on Climate Change, which, while formally functional, effectively does Box 13.2 | Climate Change Institutions in the UK
The central institutional arrangements of climate governance in the UK were established by the 2008 Climate Change Act (CCA): 
statutory five-year carbon budgets; an independent advisory body, the Committee on Climate Change (CCC); mandatory progress 
monitoring and reporting to Parliament; and continuous adaptive planning following a five-yearly cycle. The CCC is noteworthy as an 
innovative institution that has also been emulated by other countries.
The design of the CCC was influenced by the concept of independent central banking (Helm et al. 2003). It has established a reputation 
for independent high quality analysis and information dissemination, is frequently referred to in Parliament and widely used by other 
actors in policy debates, all of which suggest a high degree of legitimacy (Averchenkova et al. 2018). However, since the CCC only 
recommends rather than sets budgets (McGregor et al. 2012), accountability for meeting the carbon budgets works primarily through 
reputational and political effects rather than legal enforcement. 
Box 13.3 | China’s Climate Change Institutions
Climate governance in China features a combination of top-down planning and vertical accountability (Sims Gallagher and Xuan 2019; 
Teng and Wang 2021). An overarching coordination role is performed by the Leading Group on Carbon Peaking and Carbon Neutrality, 
appointed by and reporting to the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, and the National Leading Group on Climate 
Change Response, Energy Conservation, and Emissions Reduction (NLGCCR), headed by the Premier and consisting of more than 

the primary agency in charge of climate issues, with a corresponding local Bureau of Ecology and Environment in each province or 
city. While MEE is the leading agency for climate policy, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) is the leading 
agency for setting overall and industry-specific targets in five-year plans, and thus has a key role in coordinating carbon emissions 
targets with energy and industrial development targets (Wang et al. 2019; Yu 2021). Involvements of ministries related to foreign 
affairs, public finance, science and technology, as well as sector ministries such as transportation, construction, and manufacturing 
industries are also needed to push forward sector-specific climate initiatives. At subsidiary levels of government carbon intensity targets 
are enforced through a ‘targets and responsibilities’ system that is directly linked to the evaluation of governments’ performances (Lin 
2012a; Li et al. 2016). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
not meet (Pillai and Dubash 2021), and the weakening of climate 
units inside sectoral ministries in Brazil (Hochstetler 2021). While 
there is limited literature on the robustness of climate institutions, 
case studies suggest institutions are more likely to emerge, persist 
and be effective when institutions map to a  framing of climate 
change that has broad political support (medium evidence, medium 
agreement). Thus while mitigation focused framings and institutions 
may win political support in some countries, in other cases sectorally 
focused or multiple objectives oriented institutions may be most 
useful and resilient (Dubash 2021). 
13.2.3.2 Addressing Climate Governance Challenges
Climate governance challenges include ensuring coordination, 
building consensus by mediating conflict, and setting strategy 
(medium evidence, high agreement). Coordination is important 
because climate change is an all-of-economy and society problem 
that requires cross-sectoral and cross-scale action; building 
consensus is needed because large-scale transformations can 
unsettle established interests; and strategy setting is required due 
to the transformative and time-bound nature of climate mitigation 
(Dubash et al. 2021). Yet, climate institutions have a mixed record in 
addressing these challenges. 
Institutions that provide coordination, integration across policy areas 
and mainstreaming are particularly important given the scope and 
scale of climate change (Candel and Biesbroek 2016; Tosun and Lang 
2017) (Section 13.7). Ministries of environment are often appointed 
as de facto agents of coordination, but have been hampered by 
their limited regulative authority and ability to engage in intra-
governmental bargaining with ministries with larger budgets and 
political heft (Aamodt 2018). 
Creation of a  high-level coordinating body to coordinate across 
departments and mainstream climate into sectoral actions is 
another common approach (Oulu 2015). For example, Kenya 
has created a  National Climate Change Council, which operates 
through a  climate change directorate in the environment ministry 
to mainstream climate change at the county level (Guey and Bilich 
2019). Zhou and Mori (2011) suggest that well-functioning inter-
agency coordination mechanisms require support from heads of 
government, involvement by industry and environment agencies; and 
engagement by multiple sectoral agencies. However, coordination 
mechanisms without a clear authority and basis for setting directions 
run the risk of ‘negative coordination’, a  process through which 
ministries comment on each other’s proposals, removing any ideas 
that run counter to the interests of their own ministry, leading to 
even weaker decisions (Flachsland and Levi 2021). Countries with 
dedicated, new climate institutions tend to have a more explicit and 
authorised body for climate coordination, such as China’s National 
Leading Group (Box 13.3).
Without explicit coordination with finance ministries, there is a risk 
of parallel and non-complementary approaches. For example, the 
South African Treasury pursued a carbon tax without clear indication 
of how it interfaced with a  quantitative sectoral budget approach 
espoused by the environment ministry (Tyler and Hochstetler 2021). Skovgaard (2012) suggests that there is an important distinction 
between finance ministries that bring a  limiting ‘budget frame’ 
to climate action, versus a ‘market failure frame’ that encourages 
broader engagement by relevant ministries.
Coordination within federal systems poses additional complexities, 
such as overlapping authority across jurisdictions, multiple norms in 
place, and approaches to coordination across scales (Brown 2012). 
Multi-level governance systems such as the EU can influence the 
design and functioning of climate policies and institutions in member 
states, such as Germany (Skjærseth 2017; Jänicke and Wurzel 2019; 
Flachsland and Levi 2021) and the UK (Lockwood 2021a). In some 
cases, this can result in distinct European modes of governance as has 
been suggested occurred in the case of wind energy (Fitch-Roy 2016).
Within countries, institutional platforms allow federal and sub-
national governments to negotiate and agree on policy trajectories 
(Gordon 2015). In Germany, cooperation is channelled through 
periodic meetings of environment ministers and centre-state working 
groups (Weidner and Mez 2008; Brown 2012), and in Canada 
through bilateral negotiations and side-payments between scales of 
government (Rabe 2007; Gordon 2015). Federal systems might allow 
for sub-national climate action despite constraints at the federal 
level, as has occurred in Australia (Gordon 2015; MacNeil 2021) and 
the United States (Rabe 2011; Jordaan et al. 2019; Bromley-Trujillo 
and Holman 2020; Thompson et al. 2020). Where agenda-setting 
rests with the central government, coordination may operate through 
targets, as with China (Qi and Wu 2013), or frameworks for policy 
action, as in India (Vihma 2011; Jogesh and Dubash 2015).
Because transition to a low-carbon future is likely to create winners 
and losers over different time scales; institutions are needed to 
mediate these interests and build consensus on future pathways 
(Kuzemko et al. 2016; Lockwood et al. 2017; Finnegan 2019; 
Mildenberger 2020). Institutions that provide credible knowledge 
can help support ambition. For example, analysis by the UK Climate 
Change committee has been harnessed, including by non-state 
actors, to prevent backsliding on decisions (Lockwood 2021a). 
Institutions can also help create positive feedback by providing 
spaces in decision-making for low-carbon interests (Aklin and 
Urpelainen 2013; Roberts et al. 2018; Lockwood et al. 2017; Finnegan 
2019). For example, a renewable energy policy community emerged 
in China through key agenda setting meetings (Shen 2017), and in 
India, a National Solar Mission provided a platform for the renewable 
energy industry (Pillai and Dubash 2021). Conversely, institutions can 
also exert a drag on change through ‘regulatory inertia’, as in the 
case of the UK energy regulator Ofgem, which has exercised veto 
powers in ways that may limit a low-carbon transition (Lockwood 
et al. 2017).
Institutions can also create spaces to accommodate concerns of 
other actors (Upadhyaya et al. 2021). Deliberative bodies, such as 
Germany’s Enquete Commission (Weidner and Mez 2008; Flachsland 
and Levi 2021) or the Brazilian Forum on Climate Change (Tyler and 
Hochstetler 2021) provide a space for reconciling competing visions 
and approaches to climate change. Many countries are creating 
deliberative bodies to forge ‘Just Transition’ strategies (Section 13.9). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13a recent innovation is the creation of Citizens’ Assemblies that bring 
together representative samples of citizens to deliberate on policy 
questions with the intent of informing them (Devaney et al. 2020; 
Sandover et al. 2021). The ability of institutions to forge agreement 
also rests on attention to procedural justice (Box 13.4).
Since addressing climate change requires transformative intent and 
shifting development pathways (Sections 1.6, 3.6, 4.3, 4.4, 13.9, 17.3.2, 
and Cross-Chapter Box  5 in Chapter  4), institutions that can devise 
strategies and set trajectories are useful enablers of transformation. 
Strategy setting often requires an overarching framework such as 
through framework laws that set targets (Averchenkova et al. 2017), 
or identify key sectors and opportunities for low-carbon transition 
(Hochstetler and Kostka 2015) and innovation (UNEP 2018). Few 
countries have built deliberate and lasting institutions that provide 
strategic intent, and those that have, have pursued different 
approaches. The UK’s approach rests on five-yearly targets (Box 13.2); 
Germany requires sectoral budgets enforced through the Bundestag 
(Flachsland and Levi 2021); and China uses an apex decision-body to 
set targets (Teng and Wang 2021) (Box 13.3). 
Addressing all of these governance concerns  – coordination, 
mediating interests, and strategy setting  – require attention to 
institutional capacity. These include the capacity to address ‘upstream’ 
policy issues of agenda setting, framing, analysis and policy design; 
pursue goals even while mediating interests (Upadhyaya et al. 2021); identify and manage synergies and trade-offs across climate and 
development objectives (Ürge-Vorsatz et al. 2014; von Stechow et al. 
2015; McCollum et al. 2018); identify and choose amongst possible 
policy options (Howlett and Oliphant 2010); identify areas for 
transformation and the means to induce innovation (Patt 2017; UNEP 
2018); and developing the ability to monitor and evaluate outcomes 
(Upadhyaya et al. 2021) (Box 13.5). Domorenok et al. (2021) highlight 
different aspects of the capacity challenge particularly necessary 
for integrated policy making including: the capacity for horizontal 
and vertical coordination; implementation capacity including the 
independence of the state from interests; and administrative capacity 
required to address compound problems. At a basic level, questions 
of governmental capacity – the numbers and training of personnel – 
can shape the choices available for climate institutions and their 
ability to be strategic (Richerzhagen and Scholz 2008; Harrison and 
Kostka 2014; Kim 2016). Box 13.5 describes South Africa’s approach 
to building monitoring and evaluation capacity.
The perceived need for attention to institutional capacity is 
highlighted by the fact that the NDCs of 113 developing countries 
out of 169 countries studied list capacity building as a condition of 
NDC implementation (Pauw et al. 2020). While international support 
for capacity is widely articulated as essential for many countries 
(Khan et al. 2020), ensuring the form of capacity is appropriate, 
effective and led domestically remains a  challenge (Nago and Krott 
2020; Sokona 2021). Box 13.4 | Procedural Justice
Decision-making consistent with energy and climate justice requires attention to procedural justice (McCauley and Heffron 2018), which 
includes how decisions are made, and who is involved and has influence on decisions (Sovacool and Dworkin 2015). Procedural justice 
emphasises the importance of equitable access to decision-making processes and non-discriminatory engagement with all stakeholders 
(Jenkins et al. 2016), attention to the capability, particularly of marginalised groups, to shape decisions (Holland 2017) and recognition 
of their specific vulnerabilities in collective political processes (Schlosberg 2012). Consensus-building institutions should avoid reducing 
normative questions to technical ones, recognising that values, interests and behaviours are all shaped by ongoing climate governance 
(Ryder 2018; Schwanen 2021). Additionally, communities affected by low-carbon transition may face challenges in articulating their 
understandings and experiences, which needs to be addressed in the design of climate institutions (Ryder 2018; Schwanen 2021). 
Spatially localised alternative discourses of justice are often more recognised socially than national and universal framings of climate 
justice (Bailey 2017). Participatory forms of governance such as climate assemblies and citizen juries (Ney and Verweij 2015) can help 
enhance the legitimacy of institutional decisions, even while empirical assessments suggest that these approaches continue to face 
practical challenges (Devaney et al. 2020; Sandover et al. 2021; Creasy et al. 2021). 
Box 13.5 | South Africa’s Monitoring and Evaluation System
South Africa’s national monitoring and evaluation system provides high-level guidance on information requirements and assessment 
methodologies (DEA 2015). The country is developing a comprehensive, integrated National Climate Change Information System, 
to enable tracking, analysis and enhancement of South Africa’s progress towards the country’s transition to a low-carbon economy 
and climate-resilient society (DFFE Republic of South Africa 2021). It includes information on GHG emission reductions achieved, 
observed and projected climate change, impacts and vulnerabilities, the impact of adaptation and mitigation actions, financial flows 
and technology transfer activities. South Africa’s approach is premised upon continuous learning and improvement through a phased 
implementation approach (DEA 2019). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
13.2.4 Institution Building at the Sub-national Level
Jurisdiction over significant mitigation-related arenas like planning, 
housing and community development reside at the sub-national 
level. To address linkages between mitigation and local concerns, 
sub-national actors engage in institution building within a broader 
socio-economic and political context, with actors and institutions at 
a multitude of scales shaping the effectiveness of sub-national-scale 
interventions (Romero-Lankao et al. 2018a). Mitigation policies may 
demand coordination between sectoral and jurisdictional units that 
historically have not collaborated; they may require sub-national 
actors to confront politically sensitive issues such as carbon taxes 
or increases in utility rates; and they may demand a redistribution 
of resources to protect endangered ecosystems or vulnerable 
populations (Hughes and Romero-Lankao 2014). 
Sub-national actors have built climate institutions by creating new 
visions and narratives, by setting new entities or committing existing 
offices, providing them with funds, staff and legal authority, or by 
experimenting with innovative solutions that could be transferred 
to other local governments or scaled nationally (Hoffmann 2011; 
Hoornweg et al. 2011; Aylett 2015; Hughes and Romero-Lankao 2014; 
Romero-Lankao et al. 2015; Hughes 2019b). These actors have also 
created task forces, referendums, coordination of financial and human 
resources, technical assistance, awareness campaigns and funding 
(Castán Broto 2017; Romero-Lankao et al. 2018a; Hughes 2019b). 
National governments can play a key role supporting planning for 
climate change at the regional and national level, for example, 
through the articulation of climate change action in national urban 
politics (Van Den Berg et al. 2018; Cobbinah et al. 2019). 
13.2.4.1 Significance of Sub-national Networks
Multi-jurisdictional and multi-sectoral sub-national networks in 
dozens of countries globally have helped build climate institutions. 
They have also facilitated social and institutional learning, and 
addressed gaps in national policy (Holden and Larsen 2015; Jordan 
et al. 2015; Setzer 2015; Haarstad 2016; Hermwille 2018; Kammerer 
and Namhata 2018; Rashidi and Patt 2018; Westman and Castan 
Broto 2018; Lee and Jung 2018; Lee 2019; Schwartz 2019). 
Transnational networks have opened opportunities for sub-national 
actors to play a crucial mitigation role in political stalemates (Jones 
2014; Schwartz 2019). The C40, the Global Covenant of Mayors for 
Climate and Energy, and ICLEI have disseminated information on best 
practices and promoted knowledge sharing between sub-national 
governments (Lee 2013; Hakelberg 2014; Heidrich et al. 2016; Kona 
et al. 2016; Di Gregorio et al. 2020) (Section 14.5.5). Organisations 
such as the US Carbon Cycle Working Group of the United States 
Global Change Research Program, the Australian Climate Action 
Network, and the Mexican Metropolitan Environmental Commission 
have helped facilitate coordination and learning across multiple 
jurisdictions and sectors, and connected ambiguous spaces between 
public, private and civil society actors (Romero-Lankao et al. 2015; 
Horne and Moloney 2019; Hughes 2019b). Transnational networks have limited influence on climate policies 
where national governments exert top-down control (e.g., in the city 
of Rizhao, China) (Westman et al. 2019); where sub-national actors 
face political fragmentation, lack regulations, and financial and 
human resources; or where vertically-integrated governance exists, 
as in State of São Paulo, Santiago de Chile, and Mexico City (Romero-
Lankao et al. 2015; Setzer 2017).
Public support for sub-national climate institutions increases when 
climate policies are linked to local issues such as travel congestion 
alleviation or air pollution control (Puppim de Oliveira 2013; Romero-
Lankao et al. 2013; Simon Rosenthal et al. 2015; Romero-Lankao 
et al. 2015; Ryan 2015), or when embedded in development priorities 
that receive support from the national government or citizens 
(Jörgensen et al. 2015b; Floater et al. 2016; Dubash et al. 2018). 
For example, Indian cities have engaged in international climate 
cooperation seeking innovative solutions to address energy, water 
and infrastructure problems (Beermann et al. 2016). 
13.2.4.2 Factors Influencing Institution Building 
at the Sub-national Level
Availability of federal funding is a fundamental pillar of city actors’ 
capacity to develop mitigation policies. Administrative structures, 
such as the presence of a  professional city manager and staff 
assigned specifically to climate efforts (Simon Rosenthal et al. 2015). 
Cooperation between administrative departments, and the creation 
of knowledge and data on energy use and emissions are also 
essential for mitigation planning (Hughes and Romero-Lankao 2014; 
Ryan 2015). For example, the high technical competency of Tokyo’s 
bureaucracy combined with availability of historical and current data 
enabled the city’s unique cap-and-trade system on large building 
facilities (Roppongi et al. 2017).
Visions and narratives about the future benefits or risks of climate 
change are often effectively advanced at the sub-national level, 
drawing on local governmental abilities to bring together actors 
involved in place-based decarbonisation across sectors (Hodson 
and Marvin 2009; Bush et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2018; Prendeville 
et al. 2018; Levenda et al. 2019). For example, in the plans of 

economically prosperous, and socially just cities, that are habitable, 
secure, resource-efficient, socially and economically inclusive, and 
competitive internationally (Romero-Lankao and Gnatz 2019). 
However, institution building is often constrained by a lack of national 
support, funding, human resources, coalitions, coordination across 
old and new organisations, and the ability to create new institutional 
competences (Valenzuela 2014; Jörgensen et al. 2015a; Ryan 2015; 
Dubash et al. 2018; Romero-Lankao et al. 2018a; Anderton and Setzer 
2018; Cointe 2019; Di Gregorio et al. 2019; Jaccard et al. 2019; Hughes 
2019b). Climate mitigation can also be limited by cultural norms and 
values of policy actors with varying levels of power, and shifting 
alliances (Lachapelle et al. 2012; Damsø et al. 2016; Giampieri et al. 
2019; Romero-Lankao et al. 2018a). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Institution building is constrained by inequities; resources, legal remit, 
knowledge, and political clout vary widely within and among sub-
national governments globally (Jörgensen et al. 2015b; Genus and 
Theobald 2016; Joffe and Smith 2016; Klinsky 2018; Reckien et al. 
2018; Markkanen and Anger-Kraavi 2019). Dominant discourses tend 
to prioritise scientific and technical expertise and, thus, they focus on 
infrastructural and economic concerns over the concerns and needs 
of disadvantaged populations (Heikkinen et al. 2019; Romero-Lankao 
and Gnatz 2019).
In addition, expert driven, technical solutions such as infrastructural 
interventions can undermine the knowledge of lower income 
countries, communities or indigenous knowledge holders, yet are 
often used by sub-national governments (Ford et al. 2016; Brattland 
and Mustonen 2018; Nagorny-Koring 2019; Whyte 2017, 2020). 
Technical solutions, such as electric vehicles or smart grids rarely 
address the needs and capabilities of disadvantaged communities 
that may not be able to afford these technologies (Mistry 2014; 
Romero-Lankao and Nobler 2021). However, mitigation strategies 
in sectors such as transport and buildings have often focused on 
technical and market outcomes, the benefits of which are limited 
to some, while others experience negative externalities or face 
health risks (Markard 2018; Williams and Doyon 2019; Carley and 
Konisky 2020). Delivering climate justice requires community-
driven approaches to understanding the problem addressing 
structural inequities and fostering justice, while reducing carbon 
emissions (Romero-Lankao et al. 2018b; Carley and Konisky 2020; 
Lewis et al. 2020). 
To address this situation requires procedural justice that involves 
all communities, particularly disadvantaged, in climate mitigation 
decisions and policies (Box 13.4). Also essential is recognition justice, 
that addresses past inequities through tools such as subsidies, 
tariffs, rebates, and other policies (Agyeman 2013; Rydin 2013; UN 
Habitat 2016). Both tenets are key to ensure the fair distribution of 
benefits or negative impacts from mitigation policies (distributional 
justice) (McCauley and Heffron 2018; Lewis et al. 2020). However, 
the benefits of inclusive approaches are often overlooked in favour 
of growth oriented mitigation and planning (Rydin 2013; Altenburg 
2011; Smith 2019; Lennon 2020). Box  13.6 discusses how the city of Durban has internalised climate change with attention to 
considerations of justice.
Moreover, deep mitigation requires moving beyond existing 
technological responses (Mulugetta and Castán Broto 2018) to 
policies that correspond to the realities of developing countries 
(Bouteligier 2013). However, best practice approaches tend to 
be fragmented due to the requirements of different contexts, and 
often executed as pilot projects that rarely lead to structural change 
(Nagorny-Koring 2019). Instead, context-specific approaches that 
include consideration of values, cultures and governance better 
enable successful translation of best practices (Affolderbach and 
Schulz 2016; Urpelainen 2018).
13.3 Structural Factors that Shape 
Climate Governance
A growing literature suggests that ambitious climate policy emerges 
out of strong domestic political support (medium evidence, medium 
agreement) (Aklin and Mildenberger 2020; Lamb and Minx 2020; 
Colgan et al. 2021). Such support is the outcome of political interest 
constellations and struggles that vary from country to country. 
Structural factors (such as economic wealth and natural resources, 
the character of the national political system, and the dominant ideas, 
values and beliefs) shape how climate change is governed (medium 
evidence, high agreement) (Boasson 2015; Hochstetler 2020). This 
section assesses the ways these structural factors affect political 
dynamics and decision-making, and ultimately constrain, sustain or 
enable development of domestic climate governance.
While these structural factors are crucial, they do not determine the 
outlook of given countries’ climate governance, as civic, corporate 
and/or political groups or individuals can be mobilised and seek 
to counteract these structural effects, as indicated in the following 
Section 13.4 that examines the role of various actors and agencies 
in shaping governance processes. Taken together, Sections 13.3 and 
13.4 show that domestic climate governance is not fully constrained 
by structural factors, but rather that diverse actors can and do achieve 
substantial changes. Box 13.6 | Institutionalising Climate Change Within Durban’s Local Government
Durban has effectively linked climate change agendas with ongoing sustainability actions and goals. To do so, adaptation has 
been broadened to include a just transition to a low-carbon future to address development, energy security and GHG reduction 
(Roberts et al. 2016). 
Durban has mainstreamed climate and justice concerns within local government through strong local leadership by key individuals and 
departments; included climate concerns within various municipal short-term and long-term planning processes; mobilised civil society; 
enhanced local and international networking; explored funding opportunities; and restructured institutions (Roberts et al. 2016). 
Durban shows that embedding responses to climate change within local government activities requires that climate change is made 
relevant locally and framed within a broader environmental justice framework (Roberts 2010). Civil society has been key in balancing 
the influence of the private sector on Durban’s dynamic political process (Aylett 2013). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
13.3.1 Material Endowments 
Material endowments are natural and economic resources, such as 
fossil fuels and renewable energy, forests and land, and economic or 
financial resources, which tend to shape developments of domestic 
climate governance (medium evidence, high agreement) (Friedrichs 
and Inderwildi 2013; Lachapelle and Paterson 2013; Bang et al. 2015; 
Lamb and Minx 2020). Most countries’ social and economic systems 
are largely developed on the basis of their material endowment, and 
thus they contribute to shape the distribution of political power in 
that country (Hall and Soskice 2001). Material endowments are by 
no means the only influencing factor, and actors may succeed to 
either circumvent or exploit material endowments to impact climate 
governance (limited evidence, medium agreement) (Boasson 2015; 
Green and Hale 2017; Aklin and Mildenberger 2020). 
Since countries are not bound by their material endowment, countries 
with similar material endowments may differ in climate governance, 
whereas those with notable differences in material endowments 
may have similar policies. For instance, countries with rich fossil fuel 
endowments are found either adopting rather ambitious emission 
reduction targets and measures, or remaining weak in developing 
domestic climate policies (Eckersley 2013; Farstad 2019). Further, 
countries with radically different electricity systems and energy 
resource potentials are found developing rather similar renewables 
support schemes such as feed-in-tariff subsidies and competitive 
tendering programmes (Dobrotkova et al. 2018; Vanegas Cantarero 
2020; Boasson et al. 2021). Some policy instruments are widely 
applied in both developed and developing countries with similar 
or different material endowment. For example, renewable energy 
auctions have been experimented by over 100 countries by the end 
of 2018 (IRENA 2019).
Rich carbon-intensive resources and well developed infrastructure 
can make low-carbon activities relatively less economically profitable, 
and negatively influence some perceptions of climate mitigation 
potential (Bertram et al. 2015a; Erickson et al. 2015). If effective 
climate policies are introduced despite this, they can alter the 
importance of country’s material endowments in a way that underpin 
more forceful climate governance over time. For instance, policy 
interventions to limit fossil fuel exploitation or support renewable 
energy deployment may change the value of these energy resources 
over time (Schmitz et al. 2015; Ürge-Vorsatz et al. 2018; Chailleux 
2020; Colgan et al. 2021). 
Developing countries face additional material constraints in climate 
governance due to challenges associated with underdevelopment 
and scarce economic or natural resources (medium evidence,  high 
agreement). Hence, many developing countries design domestic 
climate mitigation policies in combination with policy goals that 
address various developmental challenges (von Stechow et al. 
2016; Deng et al. 2017; Thornton and Comberti 2017; Campagnolo 
and Davide 2019), such as air quality, urban transportation, energy 
access, and poverty alleviation (Klausbruckner et al. 2016; Li 
et al. 2016; Melamed et al. 2016; Slovic et al. 2016; Khreis et al. 
2017; Geall et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018). Combining climate and 
developmental policies for beneficial synergies should not overlook potential trade-offs and challenges (Dagnachew et al. 2018; Ellis 
and Tschakert 2019; Peñasco et al. 2021) (Section  13.7.2 for 
wider discussion).
13.3.2 Political Systems
The effectiveness of domestic climate governance will significantly 
rely on how well it fits with the features of the countries’ specific 
political systems (limited evidence, high agreement) (Schmitz 
2017; Lamb and Minx 2020). Political systems have developed 
over generations and constitute a set of formal institutions, such as 
laws and regulations, bureaucratic structures, political executives, 
legislative assemblies and political parties (Egeberg 1999; Pierson 
2004). Different political systems create differing conditions for 
climate governance to emerge and evolve, but because political 
systems are so politically and historically entrenched they are not 
likely to change quickly even though this could facilitate domestic 
climate mitigation efforts (medium evidence, high agreement) 
(Duit and Galaz 2008; Boasson et al. 2021). In addition, variations 
in governance capacities also affect climate policy making and 
implementation (Meckling and Nahm 2018). 
Broader public participation and more open contestation spaces tend 
to nurture more encompassing climate policies, facilitate stronger 
commitments to international agreements (Bättig and Bernauer 2009; 
Böhmelt et al. 2016), achieve more success in decoupling economic 
growth from CO 2 emissions (Lægreid and Povitkina 2018), reduce 
more CO 2 emissions (Clulow 2019; von Stein 2020), and maintain 
lower deforestation rates (medium evidence, medium agreement) 
(Buitenzorgy and Mol 2011). States with less public participation 
and contestation space can also develop ambitious climate emission 
reduction targets and institutions (Zimmer et al. 2015; Eckersley 
2016; Han 2017; Engels 2018), but the drivers and effects of climate 
policies within less open and liberal political contexts has not yet 
been sufficiently investigated. 
Election systems based on proportional representation tend to have 
lower emissions, higher energy efficiency, higher renewable energy 
deployment, and more climate friendly investment than systems 
where leadership candidates have to secure a majority of the votes 
to be elected (medium evidence, high agreement) (Fredriksson and 
Millimet 2004; Lachapelle and Paterson 2013; Finnegan 2019). Such 
systems better enable voters supporting ambitious climate positions 
to influence policymaking (Harrison and Sundstrom 2010; Willis 2018), 
place less political risks on legislators from additional costs incurred 
from climate actions on voters (Finnegan 2018, 2019), and strengthen 
credible commitments to climate policy (Lockwood 2021b). Similarly, 
rules that govern the relationship between governments and civic 
societies in decision-making have also been shown to matter in 
climate governance. Corporatist societies, where economic groups 
are formally involved in public policy making, have better climate-
related outcomes (lower CO 2 emissions and higher low-carbon 
investments) than liberal-pluralist countries, where a  larger array 
of non-governmental organisations compete for informal influence, 
often through lobbying (medium evidence, medium agreement) 
(Liefferink et al. 2009; Jahn 2016; Finnegan 2018). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Political parties with similar ideological roots in different countries 
(for instance social democratic or conservative parties) may 
have different positions on climate governance across countries 
(Boasson et al. 2021). Nevertheless, on average, a higher share of 
green parties in a parliament is associated with lower greenhouse 
gas emissions (Neumayer 2003; Jensen and Spoon 2011; Mourao 
2019), and left-wing parties tend to adopt more pro-climate 
policy positions (medium evidence,  high agreement) (Carter 2013; 
Tobin 2017; Farstad 2018; Ladrech and Little 2019). There is also 
evidence, however, that conservative parties in some countries 
support climate measures (Båtstrand 2015) and consensus can be 
achieved on climate actions across the political spectrum (Thonig 
et al. 2021). At the same time, it seems harder to get support for 
new climate governance initiatives in systems where many political 
groups can block decision due to many veto points, for instance 
in systems with bicameralism (the legislature is divided into two 
separate assemblies) and/or in federalist governments (where 
regions have national political representation, e.g. USA and Brazil) 
(medium evidence,  high agreement) (Madden 2014; von Stein 
2020) although federal systems hold out the possibility of sub-
national action when federal agreement is limited (Section 13.2). 
There remains a  limited literature on the role of green parties 
and veto points in developing countries (Haynes 1999; Kernecker 
and Wagner 2019). 
In any political system, climate policy adoption and implementation 
may be obstructed by corrupt practices (Rafaty 2018; Fredriksson 
and Neumayer 2016) that entail an abuse of entrusted power for 
private gain (medium evidence,  high agreement) (Treisman 2000). 
Evidence shows that CO 2 emissions levels can be affected by 
corruption, either through the direct negative effect of corruption 
on law enforcement, including in the forestry sector (Sundström 
2016), or through the negative effect of corruption on countries’ 
income (Welsch 2004).These early findings are reinforced by 
studies of a global sample of countries (Cole 2007) and from across 
the developing world (Sahli and Rejeb 2015; Bae et al. 2017; Wang 
et al. 2018b; Ridzuan et al. 2019; Habib et al. 2020). Corruption 
also disrupts public support of climate policies by affecting the 
levels of trust (medium evidence,  high agreement) (Harring 2013; 
Fairbrother et al. 2019; Davidovic and Harring 2020), which then 
impact on the compliance of climate policies. More research is 
required to further understand the causal mechanisms between 
corrupt practices and emissions.
13.3.3 Ideas, Values and Belief Systems
Ideas, values and beliefs affect climate governance by shaping 
people’s perceptions, attitude, and preferences on specific policy and 
governance issues (medium evidence, high agreement) (Boasson 
2015; McCright et al. 2016b; Schifeling and Hoffman 2019; Leipold 
et al. 2019; Boasson et al. 2021). While these are often entrenched, 
they can also change, for instance when facing growing exposures 
to climate risks, stronger scientific evidence, and dominant public or 
political discourse (Mayer et al. 2017; Diehl et al. 2021). While change 
tend to be incremental, the pace of change may vary substantially 
across countries and specific climate issue areas.However, new norms sometimes only influence political discussion 
and not actual governance. For instance, more ambitious climate 
emission reduction targets may not lead to more effective mitigation 
actions or policy instruments. Put another way, words do not replace 
actions (Geden 2016). 
Different sets of beliefs can shape climate-related policies, targets, 
and instruments (Boasson and Wettestad 2013; Boasson 2015; 
Boasson et al. 2021). First, beliefs link climate governance with social 
justice concerns; policies, targets and instruments may therefore 
reflect justice issues (Fuller and McCauley 2016; Reckien et al. 2017; 
McCauley and Heffron 2018; Routledge et al. 2018; Bäckstrand and 
Lövbrand 2006, 2019). Second, climate mitigation may be seen as 
primarily a market correction issue and mitigation compatible with 
economic growth, as exemplified by ecological modernisation (Mol 
et al. 2009; Bäckstrand and Lövbrand 2006, 2019), climate capitalism 
(Newell and Paterson 2010), market logics (Boasson 2015; Boasson 
et al. 2021) or a global commons approach (Bernstein and Hoffmann 
2019). Third, climate governance may be understood relative to policies 
on technological innovation and progress, often conceptualised as 
social-technical transformations (Geels et al. 2017a). 
Significant variation in ideas, values and beliefs related to climate 
governance are detected across and within regions, countries, 
societies, organisations, and individuals (medium evidence, medium 
agreement) (Shwom et al. 2015; Boasson et al. 2021; Knox-Hayes 
2016; Wettestad and Gulbrandsen 2018). These factors provide the 
context for climate policymaking and include differences in countries’ 
histories (Aamodt 2018; Aamodt and Boasson 2020); the political 
culture and regulatory traditions in governing environmental and 
energy issues (Tosun 2018; Aamodt 2018; Boasson et al. 2021); 
and even bureaucrats’ educational background (Rickards et al. 
2014). Structural factors in a  country, such as deeply held value 
systems, are not changed rapidly, just as political systems or natural 
endowments, are not changed rapidly. Consequently, climate policy 
and governance is more effective if it takes into account these deep-
rooted values and beliefs.
Differences in dominant individual preferences may also be important. 
The factors that shape individual ideas, values and beliefs about 
climate governance include trust in politicians, the state and other 
people in general (Drews and van den Bergh 2016; Harring et al. 2019; 
Huber et al. 2020), fairness beliefs, variation in political orientation 
(left leaning more concerned), and class (medium evidence, medium 
agreement) (Schmitz et al. 2018; Inglehart and Norris 2017). 
Levels of climate change concern on the individual level have 
increased in most countries (Shwom et al. 2015), and vary with 
gender (females are more concerned), and place of residence (urban 
residents are more concerned) (Shwom et al. 2015; McCright et al. 
2016a; Ziegler 2017). The higher educated in developing countries 
tend to be more concerned (Lee et al. 2015) while individuals working 
in polluting industries tend to oppose forceful climate governance 
(Bechtel et al. 2019; Mildenberger 2020). 
Shifts in mainstream ideas, values and beliefs can underpin changes 
in climate policy choices and policy outcomes (limited evidence, 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
medium agreement) (Schleich et al. 2018; Mildenberger and Tingley 
2019). For example, emission trading schemes are welcomed as a new 
regulatory instrument in China in the context of its market-oriented 
reforms and ideological shift in the past decades (Lo 2013). Based 
on the study of 167 nation-states and 95 sub-national jurisdictions 
with carbon pricing, researchers find that that high public belief in 
climate science underpin adoption of systems that produce a rather 
high carbon price (Levi et al. 2020). These public opinions need to 
be identified and leveraged in supporting specific policy choices 
or changes (Mildenberger and Tingley 2019). Policy support tends 
to be greater if people believe effective measures are being taken 
by other actors, including other households (Bostrom et al. 2018; 
Marlon et al. 2019), and other countries and at the international level 
(Schleich et al. 2018). 
On the other hand, anti-climate ideas or beliefs may arise due to 
the introduction of more constraining or ambitious climate policies, 
for example protests in reaction to toll roads in Norway, which 
increase the cost of driving, or protests in France against increasing 
carbon taxes (Grossman 2019; Wanvik and Haarstad 2021). The 
policy implication is that vulnerable or effected groups should be 
considered when introducing policy change, and that participation, 
transparency, and good communication all helps to reduce climate-
related discontent. 
Survey-based studies of public perceptions on hypothetical policy 
instruments or activities, such as carbon taxes or energy infrastructure, 
suggest that linking climate policy to other economic and social 
reforms can increase public support for climate governance (Carattini 
et al. 2019; Bergquist et al. 2020). People and politicians tend to 
underestimate other peoples’ and politicians’ willingness to support 
mitigation policies (Hurlstone et al. 2014; Mildenberger and Tingley 
2019), but if actors are informed about other actors actual perceptions 
and behaviours this may reduce the tendency to underestimate 
climate governance support (Mildenberger and Tingley 2019).
13.4 Actors Shaping Climate Governance 
While Section 13.3 shows that structural factors condition climate 
governance, their ultimate importance also depends on whether and 
how various actors are mobilised (Hochstetler 2020; Boasson 2015). 
a  wide range of regional and local governments as well as non-
governmental actors have become increasingly engaged in climate 
governance, for instance through public-private partnerships and 
transnational networks (Jordan et al. 2015; Dorsch and Flachsland 
2017; Jordan et al. 2018) and through the media and litigation, as 
discussed here. 
Climate governance processes result from both slow-moving 
incremental changes to policy and more rapid bursts of change 
due to, for example, responses to dramatic weather events, general 
elections or global climate summits (medium evidence, high 
agreement) (Aamodt and Stensdal 2017; Jordan and Moore 2020; 
Boasson et al. 2021). While Section 13.3 assessed how entrenched 
structural factors conditions climate governance developments, this 
section examines how actors are able to alter climate governance by engaging the climate policy process, undertaking litigation and 
interacting with media.
13.4.1 Actors and Agency in the Public Process
A broad array of actors are engaged in shaping mitigation policy 
processes, including politicians and political parties, corporate actors, 
citizen groups, indigenous peoples organisations, labour unions and 
international organisations. Actors aiming to influence the climate-
related policymaking process are studied together to understand 
climate policy dynamics and outcomes (Bulkeley 2000; Fisher 2004; 
Jost and Jacob 2004; Jasny et al. 2015; Fisher and Leifeld 2019; Jasny 
and Fisher 2019) and collaboration and influence within climate 
policy networks (Ingold and Fischer 2014; McAllister et al. 2014; 
Wagner and Ylä-Anttila 2018; Kammerer et al. 2021). Most research, 
however, focuses on one particular type of actor. 
Political actors are decision-makers, and also influence whether 
climate governance is perceived as urgent and appropriate (Okereke 
et al. 2019; Ferrante and Fearnside 2019; Boasson et al. 2021). They 
include political parties, legislative assemblies and committees, 
governmental executives and the political leaders of governmental 
ministries (Boasson 2015). They are more likely to pay attention to 
climate issues when polling indicates high political salience with the 
public (Carter 2006, 2014), or when it becomes a  contested issue 
among differing political parties (Boasson et al. 2021). Fluctuations 
in the public’s interest and attention may underpin a  disjointed 
approach in politicians’ engagement (Willis 2017, 2018). Policy 
implementation can be hampered if political actors propose frequent 
policy changes (Boasson et al. 2021). 
Corporate actors often influence policies and their adoption (Pulver 
and Benney 2013; Mildenberger 2020; Goldberg et al. 2020). 
Corporate actors acting individually or through industry associations, 
have worked to sway climate policy in different countries (Falkner 
2008; Bernhagen 2008; Newell and Paterson 2010; Meckling 2011; 
Mildenberger 2020). Their ability varies by country and issue (medium 
evidence, medium agreement) (Skjærseth and Skodvin 2010; 
Boasson and Wettestad 2013; Boasson 2015; Boasson et al. 2021) 
and depends on material endowments (Moe Singh 2012), access 
to the political system (Dillon et al. 2018; Mildenberger 2020), and 
the ability to shape ideas, values and belief systems (Boasson 2015). 
Corporate actors tend to change their climate policy preferences over 
time, as indicated by longitudinal studies of some European countries 
(Boasson and Wettestad 2013; Boasson 2015; Boasson et al. 2021).
Corporate actors are crucial to policy implementation because they 
are prominent emitters of the greenhouse gases and owners of 
carbon-intensive technologies and potential providers of solutions 
as developers, owners and adopters of low emission practices and 
technologies (Falkner 2008; Perrow and Pulver 2015). Many climate 
policies and measures rely on businesses’ willingness to exploit 
newly created economic opportunities, such as support schemes 
for renewable energy and energy efficiency sector or carbon pricing 
(Olsen 2007; Newell and Paterson 2010; Shen 2015; World Bank 
2019). Some corporate actors provide climate solutions, such as 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13renewable energy deployment, and have successfully influenced 
climate policy development related to feed-in tariffs, taxations, 
quotas, or emission trading schemes, in the EU (Boasson 2019), 
Germany (Leiren and Reimer 2018), the USA (Stokes and Breetz 
2018), the Nordic countries (Kooij et al. 2018), China (Shen 2017) 
and Japan (Li et al. 2019).
Fossil fuel industries have been important agenda-setters in many 
countries, including the USA (Dunlap and McCright 2015; Supran and 
Oreskes 2017; Downie 2018), the EU (Skjærseth and Skodvin 2010; 
Boasson and Wettestad 2013), Australia (Ayling 2017), China (Shen 
and Xie 2018; Tan et al. 2021), India (Schmitz 2017; Blondeel and Van 
de Graaf 2018), and Mexico (Pulver 2007), with differing positions 
and impacts across countries (Kim et al. 2016; Nasiritousi 2017). 
In the US, the oil industry has underpinned emergence of climate 
scepticism (Dunlap and McCright 2015; Farrell 2016a; Supran and 
Oreskes 2017), and its spread abroad (Dunlap and Jacques 2013; 
Engels et al. 2013; Painter and Gavin 2016). Corporate opposition 
to climate policies is often facilitated by a broad coalition of firms 
(Cory et al. 2021). 
Conservative foundations, sometimes financed by business revenues, 
have funded a  diversity of types of groups, including think-tanks, 
philanthropic foundations, or activist networks to oppose climate 
policy (Brulle 2014, 2019). However, there is limited knowledge 
about the conditions under which actors opposed to climate action 
succeed in shaping climate governance (Kinniburgh 2019; Martin 
and Islar 2021).
Some labour unions have developed positions and programmes on 
climate change (Snell and Fairbrother 2010; Stevins 2013; Räthzel 
et al. 2018), formed alliances with other actors in the field of climate 
policy (Stevis 2018) and participated in domestic policy networks on 
climate change (Jost and Jacob 2004), but we know little about their 
relative importance or success. In countries with significant fossil fuel 
resources such as Australia, Norway, and the United States, labour 
unions, particularly industrial unions, tend to contribute to reducing 
the ambition of domestic climate policies mainly due to the concern 
of job losses (Mildenberger 2020). Other studies find that the role of 
labour unions varies across countries (Glynn et al. 2017).
Civil society actors can involve citizens working collectively to 
change individual behaviours that have climate implications. For 
example, environmental movements that involve various forms of 
collective efforts encourage their members to make personal lifestyle 
changes that reduce their individual carbon footprints (Ergas 2010; 
Middlemiss 2011; Haenfler et al. 2012; Cronin et al. 2014; Saunders 
et al. 2014; Büchs et al. 2015; Wynes et al. 2018). These efforts seek 
to change individual members’ consumer behaviours by reducing 
car-use and flying, shifting to non-fossil fuel sources for individual 
sources of electricity, and eating less dairy or meat (Cherry 2006; 
Ergas 2010; Middlemiss 2011; Haenfler et al. 2012; Stuart et al. 2013; 
Cronin et al. 2014; Saunders et al. 2014; Büchs et al. 2015; Wynes and 
Nicholas 2017; Wynes et al. 2018; Thøgersen et al. 2021). Consumer/
citizen engagement is sometimes encouraged through governmental 
directives, such as the ‘renewable energy communities’ granted by the 
EU renewable energy directive 2018/2001 (The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union 2018). To date, there are only 
a limited number of case studies that measure the direct effect of 
participation in these types of movements as it relates to climate 
outcomes (Saunders et al. 2014; Vestergren et al. 2018, 2019). 
Citizens with less access to resources and power also participate 
by challenging nodes of power  – policymakers, regulators, and 
businesses  – to change their behaviours and/or accelerate their 
efforts. Tactics include lobbying, legal challenges, shareholder 
activism, coop board stewardship, and voting (Gillan and Starks 
2007; Schlozman et al. 2012; Viardot 2013; Bratton and McCahery 
2015; Yildiz et al. 2015; Olzak et al. 2016). Citizens provide the labour 
and political will needed to pressure political and economic actors 
to enact emission-reducing policies, as well as providing resistance 
to them (Fox and Brown 1998; Boli and Thomas 1999; Oreskes and 
Conway 2012; McAdam 2017). 
Other citizen engagement involves a range of more confrontational 
tactics, such as boycotting, striking, protesting, and direct action 
targeting politicians, policymakers, and businesses (Fisher et al. 2005; 
Tarrow 2005; Fisher 2010; Saunders et al. 2012; Walgrave et al. 2012; 
Wahlström et al. 2013; Eilstrup-Sangiovanni and Bondaroff 2014; 
Hadden 2014, 2015; O’Brien et al. 2018; Chamorel 2019; Cock 2019; 
2019b; Hadden and Jasny 2019; Swim et al. 2019). Climate strikes and 
other more confrontational forms of climate activism have become 
increasingly common (O’Brien et al. 2018; Evensen 2019; D.A. Fisher 
2019; Boulianne et al. 2020; Martiskainen et al. 2020; de Moor et al. 
2021; Fisher and Nasrin 2021a). Very few studies look specifically at 
the effect of these tactics on actual climate-related outcomes and 
more research is needed to understand the climate effects of citizen 
engagement and activism (Fisher and Nasrin 2021b).
Citizen engagement has also become common among indigenous 
groups who tend to have limited structural power but often aim to 
shape the formation and effects of projects that have implications 
to  climate change. These include opposing extraction and 
transportation of fossil fuels on their traditional lands (especially 
in the Americas) (Bebbington and Bury 2013; Hindery 2013; Coryat 
2015; Claeys and Delgado Pugley 2017; Wood and Rossiter 2017); 
large-scale climate mitigation projects that may affect traditional 
rights (Brannstrom et al. 2017; Moreira et al. 2019; Zárate-Toledo 
et al. 2019); supporting deployment of small-scale renewable energy 
initiatives (Thornton and Comberti 2017); seeking to influence the 
development of REDD+ policies through opposition (Reed 2011); 
and participation in consultation processes and multi-stakeholder 
bodies (Bushley 2014; Gebara et al. 2014; Astuti and McGregor 2015; 
Kashwan 2015; Jodoin 2017). Indigenous groups have been reported 
to have had some influence on some climate discussions, particularly 
forest management and siting of renewable energy (Claeys and 
Delgado Pugley 2017; Jodoin 2017; Thornton and Comberti 2017). 
Further, more scientific assessments are required on the role of 
indigenous groups in climate activism and policy (Jodoin 2017; 
Claeys and Delgado Pugley 2017; Thornton and Comberti 2017).
Activism, including litigation, as well as the tactics of protest and 
strikes, have played a  substantial role in pressuring governments 
to create environmental laws and environmental agencies tasked 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
with enforcing environmental laws that aimed to maintain clean air 
and water in countries around the world (medium evidence, high 
agreement) (McCloskey 1991; Schreurs 1997; Rucht 1999; Brulle 
2000; Steinhardt and Wu 2016; Longhofer et al. 2016; Wong 2018). 
Several studies find environmental NGOs have a positive effect on 
reductions in carbon emissions, whether through effects that operate 
across countries or (Frank et al. 2000; Schofer and Hironaka 2005; 
Jorgenson et al. 2011; Baxter et al. 2013; Longhofer and Jorgenson 
2017; Grant et al. 2018) through impact of NGOs within nations 
(Shwom 2011; Dietz et al. 2015; Grant and Vasi 2017). 
At the same time, other research has documented various forms of 
backlash against climate policies, both in terms of voting behaviour, 
as well as other collective efforts (Hill et al. 2010; Williamson et al. 
2011; McAdam and Boudet 2012; Wright and Boudet 2012; Walker 
et al. 2014; Boudet et al. 2016; Fast et al. 2016; Krause et al. 2016; 
Lyon 2016; Mayer 2016; Stokes 2016; Stokes and Warshaw 2017; 
Muradian and Pascual 2020; Stokes 2020). In a systematic analysis 
that includes movements against fossil fuel investments along 
with those against low-carbon emitting projects around the world, 
research finds that a quarter of all projects (no matter their targets) 
were cancelled after facing resistance (Temper et al. 2020).
A range of international organisations can be important, particularly 
in developing countries, for instance by assisting in framing of national 
climate governance and supporting the design of climate policies 
through technical assistance projects (Talaei et al. 2014; Ortega Díaz 
and Gutiérrez 2018; Kukkonen et al. 2018; Bhamidipati et al. 2019; 
Charlery and Trærup 2019). Yet for these climate aid initiatives to 
work effectively requires improved institutional architecture, better 
appreciation of local contexts, and more inclusive and transparent 
governance, based on evidence from many multilateral mechanisms 
like REDD+, CDM, GEF and GCF (Gomez 2013; Arndt and Tarp 2017), 
and bilateral programmes on energy, agriculture and land-use sectors (Arndt and Tarp 2017; Rogner and Leung 2018; Moss and 
Bazilian 2018). 
13.4.2 Shaping Climate Governance Through Litigation
Outside the formal climate policy processes, climate litigation is 
another important arena for various actors to confront and interact 
over how climate change should be governed (robust evidence, 
high agreement) (Wilensky 2015; Peel and Osofsky 2015, 2018; 
Bouwer 2018; Setzer and Byrnes 2019; Calzadilla 2019; Setzer and 
Vanhala 2019; Paiement 2020; Wegener 2020). Climate litigation is 
an attempt to control, order or influence the behaviour of others in 
relation to climate governance, and it has been used by a wide variety 
of litigants (governments, private actors, civil society and individuals) 
at multiple scales (local, regional, national and international) 
(Osofsky 2007; Lin 2012b; Keele 2017; McCormick et al. 2018; Peel 
and Osofsky 2018; Setzer and Vanhala 2019). Climate litigation 
has become increasingly common (UNEP2020b), but its prevalence 
varies across countries (medium evidence, high agreement) (Peel 
and Osofsky 2015; Wilensky 2015; Bouwer 2018; Lin and Kysar 2020; 
Setzer and Higham 2021). This is not surprising, given that courts 
play differing roles across varying political systems and law traditions 
(La Porta et al. 1998). 
This sub-section focuses on relevant climate litigation for policies and 
institutions. Climate litigation is further discussed in Sections 14.5.1.2 
(linkages between mitigation and human rights) and Section 14.5.3 
(cross-country implications and international courts/tribunals). 
The vast majority of climate cases have emerged in United States, 
Australia and Europe, and more recently in developing countries 
(Humby 2018; Kotze and du Plessis 2019; Peel and Lin 2019; Setzer 
and Benjamin 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; Rodríguez-Garavito 2020). Box 13.7 | Civic Engagement: The School Strike Movement
On Friday 20 August 2018, Greta Thunberg participated in the first climate school strike. Since then, Fridays for Future – the name of 
the group coordinating this tactic of skipping school on Fridays to protest inaction on climate change – has spread around the world.
In March 2019, the first global climate strike took place, turning out more than one million people around the world (Carrington 2019). 
Six months later in September 2019, young people and adults responded to a call to participate in climate strikes as part of the ‘Global 
Week for Future’ surrounding the UN Climate Action Summit (Thunberg 2019), and the number of participants globally jumped 
to an estimated six million people (Taylor et al. 2019). Although a handful of studies have reported on who was involved in these 
strikes, how they were connected, and their messaging (Marris 2019; Wahlström et al. 2019; Evensen 2019; D. Fisher 2019; Boulianne  
et al. 2020; Bevan et al. 2020; Han and Ahn 2020; Holmberg and Alvinius 2020; Jung et al. 2020; Martiskainen et al. 2020; Thackeray et al.  
2020; Trihartono et al. 2020; de Moor et al. 2021; Fisher and Nasrin 2021b), its consequences in terms of political outcomes and 
emissions reductions have yet to be fully understood (Fisher and Nasrin 2021b). 
Although digital activism makes it easier to connect globally, it is unclear how digital technology will affect the youth climate 
movement, and its effects on carbon emissions. Research suggests that online activism is likely to involve a more limited range of 
participants and perspectives (Bennett 2013; Elliott and Earl 2018). Digital tactics could also mean that groups are less embedded 
in communities and less successful at creating durable social ties, factors that have been found to lead to longer term engagement 
(Tufekci 2017; Rohlinger and Bunnage 2018; Shirky 2010). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13As  of 31 May 2021, 1841 cases of climate change litigation from 
around the world had been identified. Of these, 1387 were filed 
before courts in the United States, while the remaining 454 were 
filed in 39 other countries and 13 international or regional courts 
and tribunals (including the courts of the European Union). Outside 
the US, Australia (115), the UK (73) and the EU (58) remain the 
jurisdictions with the highest volume of cases. The majority of cases, 
1006, have been filed since 2015 (Setzer and Higham 2021). The 
number of climate litigation cases in developing countries is also 
growing. There are at least 58 cases in 18 Global South jurisdictions 
(robust evidence, high agreement) (Humby 2018; Kotze and du Plessis 
2019; Peel and Lin 2019; Setzer and Benjamin 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; 
Rodríguez-Garavito 2020; Setzer and Higham 2021).
Overall, courts have also played a  more active role for climate 
governance in democratic political systems (Peel and Osofsky 2015; 
Eskander et al. 2021). Whether and to what extent differing law 
traditions and political systems influence the role and importance 
of climate litigation has, however, not been examined enough 
scientifically (Setzer and Vanhala 2019; Peel and Osofsky 2020). 
The majority of climate change litigation cases are brought against 
governments, by civic and non-governmental organisations and 
corporations (Eisenstat 2011; Markell and Ruhl 2012; Wilensky 2015; 
Fisher et al. 2017; Setzer and Higham 2021). Many, although not all 
of these cases, seek to ensure that governmental action on climate 
change is more ambitious, and better aligned with the need to avert or 
respond to climate impacts identified and predicted by the scientific 
community (Markell and Ruhl 2012; Setzer and Higham 2021). 
Climate aligned cases against governments can be divided into two 
distinct categories: claims challenging the overall effort of a  State 
or its organs to mitigate or adapt to climate change (sometimes 
referred to as ‘systemic climate litigation’) (Jackson 2020) and claims 
regarding authorisation of third-party activity (Bouwer 2018; Gerrard 
2021; Ghaleigh 2021). 
Systemic climate litigation that seeks an increase in a  country’s 
ambition to tackle climate change has been a growing trend since 
the first court victories in the Urgenda case in the Netherlands (see 
Box  13.8 below) and the Leghari case in Pakistan in 2015. These 
cases motivated a wave of similar climate change litigation across 
the world (Roy and Woerdman 2016; Ferreira 2016; Peeters 2016; Mayer 2019; Paiement 2020; Barritt 2020; Sindico et al. 2021). 
Between 2015 and 2021, individuals and communities initiated at 
least 37 cases (including Urgenda and Leghari) against states (Setzer 
and Higham 2021), challenging the effectiveness of legislation and 
policy goals (Jackson 2020; Setzer and Higham 2021). Some cases 
also seek to shape new legal concepts such as ‘rights of nature’ 
recognised in the Future Generations case in Colombia (Savaresi and 
Auz 2019; Rodríguez-Garavito 2020) and ‘ecological damage’ in the 
case of Notre Affaire à Tous and others vs France (Torre-Schaub 2021).
Moreover, there are a  number of regulatory challenges to state 
authorisation of high-emitting projects, which differs from systemic 
cases against states (Bouwer 2018; Hughes 2019a). For instance, the 
High Court in Pretoria, South Africa, concluded that climate change 
is a  relevant consideration for approving coal-fired power plants 
(Humby 2018). Similarly, the Federal Court of Australia concluded 
that the Minister for the Environment owed a  duty of care to 
Australian children in respect to climate impacts when exercising 
a statutory power to decide whether to authorise a major extension 
to an existing coal mine (Peel and Markey-Towler 2021).
Climate change litigation has also been brought against corporations 
by regional or local governments and non-governmental 
organisations (Wilensky 2015; Ganguly et al. 2018; Foerster 2019). 
One type of private climate change litigation alleges climate change-
related damage and seeks compensation from major carbon polluters 
(Ganguly et al. 2018; Wewerinke-Singh and Salili 2020). The litigators 
claim that major oil producers are historically responsible for 
a significant portion of global greenhouse gas emissions (Heede 2014; 
Frumhoff et al. 2015; Ekwurzel et al. 2017; Stuart-Smith et al. 2021). 
These cases rely on advancements in climate science, specifically 
climate attribution (Marjanac et al. 2017; Marjanac and Patton 2018; 
McCormick et al. 2018; Minnerop and Otto 2020; Burger et al. 2020b; 
Stuart-Smith et al. 2021). It is alleged that major carbon emitters had 
knowledge and awareness of climate change and yet took actions 
to confound or mislead the public about climate science (Supran 
and Oreskes 2017). Strategic climate change litigation has also been 
used to hold corporations to specific human rights responsibilities 
(Savaresi and Auz 2019; Savaresi and Setzer 2021) (Box 13.8). 
In addition to direct cases targeting high emitters, litigation is also 
now being used to argue against financial investments in the fossil Box 13.8 | An Example of Systemic Climate Litigation: Urgenda vs State of the Netherlands
The judgement in Urgenda vs State of the Netherlands established the linkage between a state’s international duty, domestic actions, 
and human rights commitments as to the recommendations of IPCC’s AR5 (Burgers and Staal 2019; Antonopoulos 2020). It was the 
first to impose a specific emissions reduction target on a state (de Graaf and Jans 2015; Cox 2016; Loth 2016). The District Court of The 
Hague ordered the Dutch Government to reduce emissions by at least 25% by the end of 2020. Following the decision of the district 
court of The Hague in 2015 the Dutch government announced that it would adopt additional measures to achieve the 25% emissions 
reduction target by 2020 (Mayer 2019). The decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal in 2018 and the Supreme Court in 2019. 
Since the first judgment in 2015 significant changes in the climate policy environment have been reported, the results of which have 
included the introduction of a Climate Act and the decision to close all remaining coal fired power plants by 2030 (Verschuuren 2019; 
Wonneberger and Vliegenthart 2021). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
fuel industry (Franta 2017; Colombo 2021). In May 2021, the Hague 
District Court of the Netherlands issued a ground-breaking judgment 
holding energy company Royal Dutch Shell (RDS) legally responsible 
for greenhouse gas emissions from its entire value chain (Macchi and 
Zeben 2021). Claims have also been brought against banks, pension 
funds and investment funds for failing to incorporate climate risk 
into their decision-making, and to disclose climate risk to their 
beneficiaries (Wasim 2019; Solana 2020; Bowman and Wiseman 
2020). These litigation cases also impact on the financial market 
without directly involving specific financial institutions into the case 
(Solana 2020) but somehow aim to change their risk perceptions and 
attitude on high carbon activities (Griffin 2020). 
The outcomes of climate litigation can affect the stringency and 
ambitiousness of climate governance (McCormick et al. 2018; 
Eskander et al. 2021). In the United States, pro-regulation litigants 
more commonly win in relation to renewable energy and energy 
efficiency cases, and more frequently lose in relations to coal-fired 
power plant cases (McCormick et al. 2018). Outside the US, more 
than half (58%) of litigation have outcomes that are aligned with 
climate action (Setzer and Higham 2021). But these cases can also 
have impacts outside of the legal proceedings before, during and 
after the case has been brought and decided (Setzer and Vanhala 
2019). These impacts include changes in the behaviour of the parties 
(Peel and Osofsky 2015; Pals 2021), public opinion (Hilson 2019; 
Burgers 2020), financial and reputational consequences for involved 
actors (Solana 2020), and impact on further litigation (Barritt 2020). 
Individual cases have also attracted considerable media attention, 
which in turn can influence how climate policy is perceived (Nosek 
2018; Barritt and Sediti 2019; Hilson 2019; Paiement 2020). While 
there is evidence to show the influence of some key cases on climate 
agenda-setting (Wonneberger and Vliegenthart 2021), it is still 
unclear the extent to which climate litigation actually results in new 
climate rules and policies (Peel and Osofsky 2018; Setzer and Vanhala 
2019; Peel and Osofsky 2020) and to what degree this holds true 
for all cases (Jodoin et al. 2020). However, there is now increasing 
academic agreement that climate litigation has become a powerful 
force in climate governance UNEP 2020b; Burgers 2020). In general, 
litigations can be applied to constrain both public and private entities, 
and to shape structural factors mentioned in Section 13.3, such as 
the beliefs and institutions around climate governance.
13.4.3 Media as Communicative Platforms for Shaping 
Climate Governance 
Media is another platform for various actors to present, interpret and 
shape debates around climate change and its governance (Tindall 
et al. 2018). The media coverage of climate change has grown steadily 
since 1980s (O’Neill et al. 2015; Boykoff et al. 2019), but the level 
and type of coverage differs over time and from country to country 
(robust evidence, high agreement) (Boykoff 2011; Schmidt et al. 
2013; Schäfer and Schlichting 2014). Media can be a useful conduit 
to build public support to accelerate mitigation action, but may also 
be utilised to impede decarbonisation endeavours (Boykoff 2011; 
O’Neill et al. 2015; Farrell 2016b; Carmichael et al. 2017; Carmichael 
and Brulle 2018). Different media systems in different regions and countries and with unique cultural and political traditions also affect 
how climate change is communicated (Eskjær 2013).
A broad variety of media platforms cover climate change issues, 
including traditional news media, such as newspapers and 
broadcasting, digital social media (Walter et al. 2018), creative 
narratives such as climate fiction and films (Svoboda 2016); humour 
and entertainment media (Brewer and McKnight 2015; Skurka 
et al. 2018; Boykoff and Osnes 2019); and strategic communications 
campaigns (Hansen and Machin 2008; Hoewe and Ahern 2017). Media 
coverage can have far-reaching consequences on policy processes, 
but we know less about its relative importance compared to other 
policy shaping factors (medium evidence, medium agreement) (Liu 
et al. 2011; Boykoff 2011; Hmielowski et al. 2014). 
Popular culture images, science fictions and films of ecological 
catastrophe can dramatically and emotively convey the dangers 
of climate change (Bulfin 2017). The overall accuracy of the media 
coverage on climate change has improved from 2005 to 2019 in 
the United Kingdom (UK), Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the 
USA (McAllister et al. 2021). Moreover, coverage of climate science 
is increasing. One study (MeCCO) has tracked media coverage of 
climate change from over 127 sources from 59 countries in North and 
Latin America, Europe, Middle East, Africa, Asia and Oceania (Boykoff 
et al. 2021). It shows the number of media science stories in those 
sources grew steadily from 47,376 per annum to 86,587 per annum 
between 2017 and 2021 across print, broadcast, digital media and 
entertainment (Boykoff et al. 2021). 
However, increasing media coverage does not always lead to more 
accurate coverage of climate change mitigation, as it can also spur 
diffusion of misinformation (Boykoff and Yulsman 2013; van der 
Linden et al. 2015; Whitmarsh and Corner 2017; Fahy 2018; Painter 
2019). In addition, media professionals have at times drawn on the 
norm of representing both sides of a controversy, bearing the risk of 
the disproportionate representation of scepticism of anthropogenic 
climate change despite the convergent agreement in climate science 
that humans contribute to climate change, (robust evidence, high 
agreement) (Freudenburg and Muselli 2010; Boykoff 2013; Painter 
and Gavin 2016; Tindall et al. 2018; McAllister et al. 2021). This 
occurs despite increasing consensus among journalists regarding the 
basic scientific understanding of climate change (Brüggemann and 
Engesser 2017). 
Accurate transference of the climate science has been undermined 
significantly by climate change counter-movements, particularly in the 
USA (McCright and Dunlap 2000, 2003; Jacques et al. 2008; Brulle et al. 
2012; Boussalis and Coan 2016; Farrell 2016a; Carmichael et al. 2017; 
Carmichael and Brulle 2018; Boykoff and Farrell 2019; Almiron and 
Xifra 2019) in both legacy and new/social media environments through 
misinformation (robust evidence,  high agreement) (van der Linden et al. 
2017), including about the causes and consequences of climate change 
(Brulle 2014; Farrell 2016a; Farrell 2016b; Supran and Oreskes 2017). 
Misinformation can rapidly spread through social media (Walter et al. 
2018). Together with the proliferation of suspicions of ‘fake news’ and 
‘post-truth’, some traditional and social media contents have fuelled 
polarisation and partisan divides on climate change in many countries 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13(Feldman et al. 2017; Hornsey et al. 2018), which can further deter 
development of new and ambitious climate policy (Tindall et al. 2018). 
Further, the ideological stance of media also influences the intensity 
and content of media coverage, in developed and developing countries 
alike (Dotson et al. 2012; Stoddart and Tindall 2015). 
Who dominates the debate on media, and how open the debate can be 
varies significantly across countries (Takahashi 2011; Poberezhskaya 
2015) based on participants’ material and technological power. Fossil 
fuel industries have unique access to mainstream media (Geels 2014) 
via advertisements, shaping narratives of media reports, and exerting 
political influence in countries like Australia and the USA (Holmes 
and Star 2018; Karceski et al. 2020). For social media, novel technical 
tools, such as automated bots, are emerging to shape climate change 
discussion on major online platforms such as Twitter (Marlow et al. 
2021). Open debates can underpin the adoption of more ambitions 
climate policy (Lyytimäki 2011). Media coverage on energy saving, 
patriotism, and social justice in the countries like USA and the UK have 
helped connect mitigation of climate change with other concerns, 
thereby raising support to climate action (Leiserowitz 2006; Trope 
et al. 2007; Doyle 2016; Corner and Clarke 2017; Whitmarsh and 
Corner 2017; Markowitz and Guckian 2018). Further, media coverage 
of climate change mitigation has influenced public opinions through 
discussions on political, economic, scientific and cultural themes 
about climate change (medium evidence, high agreement) (Irwin and 
Wynne 1996; Smith 2000; Boykoff 2011; O’Neill et al. 2015). 
Common challenges in reporting climate change exist around the 
world (Schmidt et al. 2013; Schäfer and Painter 2021), but particularly 
so in the developing countries, due to lower capacities, lack of 
journalists’ training in complex climate subjects, and lack of access 
to clear, timely and understandable climate-related resources and 
images in newsrooms (robust evidence, high agreement) (Harbinson 
2006; Shanahan 2009; Broadbent et al. 2016; Lück et al. 2018). 
Ugandan journalist Patrick Luganda has said, ‘Those most at risk from 
the impacts of climate change typically have had access to the least 
information about it through mass media.’ (Boykoff, 2011), indicating 
that information availability and capacity is a manifestation of global 
climate (in)justice.
13.5 Sub-national Actors, Networks, 
and Partnerships
In many countries, sub-national actors and networks are a  crucial 
component of climate mitigation as they have remit over land-
use planning, waste management, infrastructure, housing and 
community development, and their jurisdictions are often where the 
impacts of climate change are felt (robust evidence, high agreement). 
Depending on the legal framework and other institutional constraints, 
sub-national actors play crucial roles in developing, delivering 
and contesting decarbonisation visions and pathways (Schroeder 
et al. 2013; Ryan 2015; Abbott et al. 2016; Bäckstrand et al. 2017; 
Amundsen et al. 2018; Fuhr et al. 2018) (Section 13.3.3). 
Sub-national actors include organisations, jurisdictions, and 
networks (e.g.,  a coalition of cities or state authorities). These are either formal or informal, profit or non-profit and 
public  or  private  (Avelino and  Wittmayer 2016). For example, 
corporations are formal, private, and for-profit, the state and labour 
organisations are  formal, public, and non-profit, and communities 
are private, informal, and non-profit. An intermediary sector, crossing 
the boundaries between private and public, for profit and non-profit, 
includes energy cooperatives, not-for-profit energy enterprises, and 
the scientific community (Avelino and Wittmayer 2016). 
To address the challenge of climate mitigation, a  range of actors 
across sectors and jurisdictions have created coalitions for climate 
governance, operating as actor-networks. For example, mitigation 
policies are particularly effective when they are integrated with 
co-benefits such as health, biodiversity, and poverty reduction 
(Romero-Lankao et al. 2018a). Transnational business and public-
private partnerships and initiatives, as well as international cooperation 
at the sub-national and city levels are discussed in Chapter 14.
13.5.1 Actor-networks and Policies 
The decision adopting the Paris Agreement welcomed contributions 
of sub-national actors to mobilising and scaling up ambitious 
climate action (see also Chapter 14). They engage in climate relevant 
mechanisms, such as the Sustainable Development Goals and the 
New Urban Agenda. Sub-national actors fill a gap in national policies, 
participate in transnational and sub-national climate governance 
networks and facilitate learning and exchange among governmental, 
community, and private organisations at multiple levels, gathering 
knowledge and best practices such as emission inventories and risk 
management tools that can be applied in multiple contexts (Kona 
et al. 2016; Sharifi and Yamagata 2016; Michaelowa and Michaelowa 
2017; Warbroek and Hoppe 2017; Bai et al. 2018; Busch et al. 2018; 
Hsu et al. 2018; Lee and Jung 2018; Marvin et al. 2018; Romero-
Lankao et al. 2018b; Ürge-Vorsatz and Seto 2018; Amundsen et al. 
2018; Heikkinen et al. 2019; Hultman et al. 2020). 
Sub-national climate change policies exist in more than 142 countries 
and exemplify the increasing significance of mitigation policy 
at  the  sub-national level (Hsu et al. 2018). However, estimations 
of the number of sub-national actors pledging voluntary climate 
action are challenging and underreporting is a concern (Hsu et al. 
2018; Chan and Morrow 2019). As can be seen in Figure 13.3 more 
than 10,500 cities and nearly 250 regions representing more than 

jurisdictions, have pledged climate action as of December 2020 (Hsu 
et al. 2020a). More jurisdictions in Europe and North America have 
pledged action, but in terms of population almost all regions are 
substantially engaged in sub-national action.
Many of these efforts are organised around transnational or regional 
networks. For example, a  coalition of 130 sub-national (in other 
words, state, and regional) governments, representing 21% of the 
global economy and 672 million people, has pledged about 9% 
emissions reduction compared to a  base year (CDP 2020). More 
than 10,000 cities, representing more than 10% of the global 
population, participate in the Global Covenant of Mayors, C40 Cities 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
(Global Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy 2018), and 
ICLEI’s – Local Governments for Sustainability carbon registry (Hsu 
et al. 2018). In Europe alone, more than 6000 cities have adopted 
their own climate action plans (Palermo et al. 2020a) and nearly 

to maintaining momentum for climate action as part of the ‘We Are 
Still In’ coalition (We Are Still In coalition 2020) in the absence of 
national US climate legislation. Further, as of October 2020, more 
than 826  cities and 103 regional governments had made specific 
pledges to decarbonise, whether in a specific sector (e.g., buildings, 
electricity, or transport) or through their entire economies, pledging 
to reduce their overall emissions by at least 80% (NewClimate 
Institute and Data Driven EnviroLab 2020). Cities such as Barcelona, 
Spain and Seattle, Washington have adopted net zero goals for 2050 
in policy legislation, while many more cities throughout the world, 
including the Global South such as Addis Ababa in Ethiopia, have net 
zero targets under consideration (ECIU 2019, 2021).
Sub-national mitigation policies are highlighted below, based on the 
taxonomy of policies in Section 13.6.1: 
a) Economic instruments: as of 2020, there were carbon pricing 
initiatives (ETS, carbon tax or both) in 24 sub-national jurisdictions 
(World Bank 2021a). Examples include emission trading systems 
within North America, such as the Regional Greenhouse Gas 
Initiative (RGGI) and Western Climate Initiative (which also 
includes two Canadian provinces); tax rebates for the purchase of EVs; a  carbon tax in British Columbia; and a  cap-and-trade 
scheme in Metropolitan Tokyo (Houle et al. 2015; Murray and 
Rivers 2015; Hibbard et al. 2018; Bernard and Kichian 2019; 
Raymond 2019; Xiang and Lawley 2019; Chan and Morrow 2019). 
b) Regulatory instruments: policies such as land use and 
transportation planning, performance standards for buildings, 
utilities, transport electrification, and energy use by public 
utilities, buildings and fleets are widely prevalent (Bulkeley 
2013; Jones 2013; C40 and ARUP 2015; Martinez et al. 2015; 
Hewitt and Coakley 2019; Palermo et al. 2020b). Policies such 
as regulatory restrictions, low emission zones, parking controls, 
delivery planning and freight routes, focus on traffic management 
and reduction of local air pollution but also have a mitigation 
impact (Slovic et al. 2016; Khreis et al. 2017; Letnik et al. 2018). 
For instance, in coordination with national governments, sub-
national actors in China, Europe and USA have introduced access 
to priority lanes, free parking and other strategies fostering the 
roll-out of EVs (Creutzig 2016; Zhang and Bai 2017; Teske et al. 
2018; Zhang and Qin 2018; Romero-Lankao et al. 2021). 
c) Land-use planning addresses building form, density, energy, 
and transport, which are relevant for decarbonisation (Creutzig 
et al. 2015; Torabi Moghadam et al. 2017; Teske et al. 2018). Its 
effectiveness is limited by absent or fragmented jurisdiction, 
financial resources and powers, competition between authorities 
and policy domains, and national policies that restrict local 
governments’ ability to enact more ambitious policies (Fudge 
et al. 2016; Gouldson et al. 2016; Petersen 2016). Most rapidly 
Figure 13.3 | Sub-national GHG mitigation commitments: Total population by IPCC region.  Population of sub-national actors (cities and regions) recording climate 
action commitments as captured in the ClimActor dataset. Population calculation considers overlap between City and Regions by only accounting for population once for Cities 
and Regions that are nested jurisdictions. Source: adapted with permission from Hsu et al. (2020a) to reflect IPCC AR6 aggregation. Compiled in 2020 from multiple sources 
based on most recent year of data available.
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13growing smaller cities in Latin America, Asia and Africa lack 
capacity for urban planning and enforcement (Romero-Lankao 
et al. 2015; Creutzig 2016).
d) Other policies: these include information and capacity building, 
such as carbon labelling aimed at providing carbon footprint 
information to consumers (Liu et al. 2016); disclosure and 
benchmarking policies in buildings to increase awareness of 
energy issues and track mitigation progress (Hsu et al. 2017; 
Papadopoulos et al. 2018); and procurement guidelines developed 
by associations (Sustainable Purchasing Leadership Council 2021). 
For instance, a building retrofit programme was initiated in New 
York and Melbourne to foster energy efficiency improvements 
through knowledge provision, training, and consultation 
(Trencher et al. 2016; Trencher and van der Heijden 2019).  
Also significant is government provision of public good, services, 
and infrastructure (Romero Lankao et al. 2019), which includes 
provision of electric buses or buses on renewable fuels for public 
transportation (Kamiya and Teter 2019) and zero emission urban 
freight transport (Quak et al. 2019), sustainable food procurement 
for public organisations in cities (Smith et al. 2016), decentralised 
energy resources (Marquardt 2014; Hirt et al. 2021; Kahsar 2021), 
and green electricity purchase via community choice aggregation 
programmes and franchise agreements (Armstrong 2019).
13.5.2 Partnerships and Experiments
Partnerships, such as those among private and public, or 
transnational and sub-national entities, have been found to enable 
better mitigation results in areas outside direct government control 
such as residential energy use, emissions from local businesses, or 
private vehicles (Fenwick et al. 2012; Castán Broto and Bulkeley 
2013; Aylett 2014; Hamilton et al. 2014; Bulkeley et al. 2016; 
Wakabayashi and Arimura 2016; Grandin et al. 2018). Partnerships 
take advantage of investments that match available grants or enable 
a local energy project, or enhance the scope or impact of mitigation 
(Burch et al. 2013). 
Sub-national actors have also been associated with experiments and 
laboratories, which promise to achieve the deep change required to 
address the climate mitigation gap (Smeds and Acuto 2018; Marvin 
et al. 2018). Experiments span smart technologies, for example, in 
Malmö, Sweden (Parks 2019), Eco-Art, Transformation-Labs and 
other approaches that question the cultural basis of current energy 
regimes and seek reimagined or reinvented futures (Castán Broto and 
Bulkeley 2013; Guy et al. 2015; Voytenko et al. 2016; Hodson et al. 
2018; Peng and Bai 2018; Smeds and Acuto 2018; Culwick et al. 2019; 
Pereira et al. 2019; Sengers et al. 2019). They may include governance 
experiments, from formally defined policy experiments to informal 
initiatives that mobilise new governance concepts (Kivimaa et al. 
2017a; Turnheim et al. 2018), and co-design initiatives and grassroots 
innovations (Martiskainen 2017; Sheikh and Bhaduri 2021). These 
initiatives often expand the scope for citizen participation. For 
example, Urban Living Labs foster innovation, coproducing responses 
to existing problems of energy use, energy poverty and mobility that 
integrate scientific and expert knowledge with local knowledge 
and common values (Voytenko et al. 2016; Marvin et al. 2018). The European Network of Living Labs  – with a  global outreach  – has 
established a model of open and citizen-centric innovation for policy 
making. The proliferation of Climate Assemblies at the national and 
sub-national level further emphasises the increasing role that citizens 
can play in both innovating and planning for carbon mitigation 
(Sandover et al. 2021).
State and local authorities are often central to initiating and 
implementing experiments and use an incremental, ‘learning by 
doing’ governing approach (Bai et al. 2010; Nevens et al. 2013; 
Castán Broto and Bulkeley 2013; Mcguirk et al. 2015; Nagorny-
Koring and Nochta 2018; Hodson et al. 2018; Peng and Bai 2018; 
Smeds and Acuto 2018; Culwick et al. 2019; Sengers et al. 2019). 
Experiments relate to technological learning and changes in policies, 
practices, services, user behaviour, business models, institutions, and 
governance (Castán Broto and Bulkeley 2013; Wieczorek et al. 2015; 
Kivimaa et al. 2017a; Laurent and Pontille 2018; Torrens et al. 2019). 
Experimentation has contributed to learning, changes in outcomes 
when implemented, and shifts in the political landscape (Turnheim 
et al. 2018). Experiments, however, are often isolated and do 
not always result in longer-term, more widespread changes. The 
transformative potential (understood as changes in the fundamental 
attributes of natural and human systems, see Annex I: Glossary) of 
experiments is constrained by uncertainty about locally relevant 
climate change solutions and effects; a lack of comprehensive, and 
sectorally inclusive national policy frameworks for decarbonisation; 
budgetary and staffing limitations; and a  lack of institutional and 
political capacity to deliver integrated and planned approaches 
(Evans and Karvonen 2014; Mcguirk et al. 2015; Bulkeley et al. 
2016; Voytenko et al. 2016; Wittmayer et al. 2016; Webb et al. 2017; 
Grandin et al. 2018; Hölscher et al. 2018; Nagorny-Koring 2019; 
Sengers et al. 2019).
13.5.3 Performance and Global Mitigation Impact 
The performance of sub-national actors’ mitigation policies have 
been measured using criteria such as existence of mitigation targets, 
incentives for mitigation, definition of a  baseline, and existence 
of a  monitoring, reporting, and verification procedure (Hsu et al. 
2019). Existing evaluations range from small-scale studies assessing 
the mitigation potential of commitments by sub-national regions, 
cities and companies in the USA or in 10 high-emitting economies 
(Roelfsema 2017; Hsu et al. 2019), to larger studies finding that over 

Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy 2018; Hsu et al. 2018, 
2019). These sub-national mitigation potential estimates vary since 
a  range of approaches exists for accounting for overlaps between 
sub-national governments and their nested jurisdictions (e.g., states, 
provinces, and national governments) (Roelfsema et al. 2018; Hsu et al. 
2019). One analysis found that the cities of New York, Berlin, London, 
Greater Toronto, Boston, and Seattle have achieved on average 
a 0.27 tCO 2-eq per capita per year reduction (Kennedy et al. 2012). 
Hsu et al. (2020c) found that 60% of more than 1000 European cities, 
representing 6% of the EU’s total emissions, are on track to achieving 
their targets, reducing more than 51 MtCO 2-eq. While evidence is 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
limited, there are concerns that implementation challenges persist 
with city level plans, particularly tied to management of initiatives 
and engagement of the population (Messori et al. 2020).
Whether participation in transnational climate initiatives impacts 
sub-national governments’ achievement on climate mitigation goals 
is uncertain. Some find that higher ambition in climate mitigation 
commitments did not translate into greater mitigation (Kona 
et al. 2016; Hsu et al. 2019). Other studies associate participation in 
networks with increased solar photovoltaic systems (PV) investment 
(Khan and Sovacool 2016; Steffen et al. 2019), and with potential to 
achieve carbon emissions reductions per capita in line with a global 
2°C scenario (Kona et al. 2016).
Reporting networks may attract high-performing actors, suggesting 
an artificially high level of cities interested in taking climate 
action or piloting solutions (self-selection bias) that may not be 
effective elsewhere (van der Heijden 2018). Many studies present 
a  conservative view of potential mitigation impact because they 
draw upon publicly reported mitigation actions and exclude sub-
national actions that are not reported (Kuramochi et al. 2020).
In addition to direct mitigation contributions, climate action 
partnerships may deliver indirect effects that, while difficult 
to quantify, ensure long-term change (Chan et al. 2015). 
Experimentation and policy innovation helps to establish best 
practices (Hoffmann 2011); set new norms for ambitious climate 
action that help build coalitions (Chan et al. 2015; Bernstein and 
Hoffmann 2018); and translate into knowledge sharing or capacity 
building (Lee  and Koski 2012; Hakelberg 2014; Purdon 2015; 
Acuto and Rayner 2016). Emergent research explores whether, in 
addition to realising outcomes, mitigation initiatives also provide 
the resources, skills and networks that governments and other 
stakeholders currently use to target other development goals (Shaw 
et al. 2014; Wolfram 2016; Wiedenhofer et al. 2018; Amundsen et al. 
2018; Heikkinen et al. 2019).13.6 Policy Instruments and Evaluation 
Institutions and governance processes described in previous section 
result in specific policies, that governments then implement and 
that shape actions of many stakeholders. This section assesses 
the empirical experience with the range of policy instruments 
available to governments with which to shape mitigation outcomes. 
Section  13.7 that follows deals with how these instruments are 
combined into packages, and Section 13.9 addresses economy-wide 
measures and issues.
 Many different policy instruments for GHG reduction are in use. 
They fall into a few major categories that share key characteristics. 
This section provides one possible taxonomy of these major types of 
policy instruments, presents a set of criteria for policy evaluation, and 
synthesises the literature on the most common mitigation policies. 
The emphasis is on recent empirical evidence on the performance 
of different policy instruments and lessons that can be drawn from 
these experiences. This builds on and enhances the AR5 Chapter 15, 
which provided a more theoretical treatment of policy instruments 
for mitigation.
13.6.1 Taxonomy and Overview of Mitigation Policies
13.6.1.1 Taxonomy of Mitigation Policies
A large number of policies and policy instruments can affect GHG 
emissions and/or sequestration, whether their primary purpose is 
climate change mitigation or not. Consequently, consistent with the 
approach in this chapter, this section adopts a broad interpretation to 
what is considered mitigation policy. Also, the section recognises the 
multiplicity of policies that overlap and interact. 
Environmental policy instruments, including for climate change 
mitigation, have long been grouped into three main categories  – 
(i) economic instruments, (ii) regulatory instruments, and (iii) other 
instruments  – although the specific terms differ across disciplines 
and additional categories are common (Kneese and Schultze 1975; 
Jaffe and Stavins 1995; Nordhaus 2013; Wurzel et al. 2013). Examples 
of common policies in each category are shown in Table 13.1, but this 
is not a comprehensive list. Principles of and empirical experience 
with the various instruments are synthesised in Sections 13.6.3 to 
13.6.5, international interactions are covered in Section 13.6.6. 
Table 13.1 | Classification of mitigation policies.
Category Examples of common types of mitigation policy instruments
Economic instrumentsCarbon taxes, GHG emissions trading, fossil fuel taxes, tax credits, grants, renewable energy subsidies, fossil fuel subsidy reductions, 
offsets, R&D subsidies, loan guarantees
Regulatory instrumentsEnergy efficiency standards, renewable portfolio standards, vehicle emission standards, ban on SF 6 uses, biofuel content mandates, 
emission performance standards, methane regulations, land-use controls
Other instruments Information programmes, voluntary agreements, infrastructure, government technology procurement policies, corporate carbon reporting
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions1313.6.1.2 Coverage of Mitigation Policies
An increasing share of global emissions sources is subject to 
mitigation policies, though coverage is still incomplete (Eskander and 
Fankhauser 2020; Nascimento et al. 2021). 
While consistent information on global prevalence of policies is not 
available, in G20 countries the use of various policy instruments 
has increased steadily over the past two decades (Nascimento et al. 
2021). The share of countries that had mitigation policy instruments 
in place rose across all sectoral categories, albeit to different extents 
in different sectors and for different policy instruments (Figure 13.4). 
Among G20 countries the electricity and heat generation has the 
greatest number of policies in place, and the agriculture and forestry 
sector the fewest (Nascimento et al. 2021). 
The mix of policies has shifted towards more regulatory instruments 
and carbon pricing relative to information policies and voluntary 
action (Schmidt and Fleig 2018; Eskander and Fankhauser 2020). 
The IEA database, which tracks renewable energy and energy 
efficiency policies at the national and sub-national levels for about 

energy and energy efficiency policies annually from 2010 through 


While an increasing share of CO 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion 
is subject to mitigation policies, there remain many countries 
and sectors where no dedicated mitigation policies apply to fuel combustion. Fossil fuel use is subject to energy taxes in the majority 
but not all jurisdictions, and in some instances, it is subsidised. 
The main gaps in current mitigation policy coverage are non-CO 2 
emissions and CO 2 emissions associated with production of industrial 
materials and chemical feedstocks, which are connected to broader 
questions of shifting to cleaner production systems (Bataille et al. 
2018a; Davis et al. 2018). Sequestration policies focus mainly on 
forestry and carbon capture and storage (CCS) with limited support 
for other carbon dioxide removal and use options (Geden et al. 2019; 
Vonhedemann et al. 2020). 
13.6.1.3 Stringency and Overall Effectiveness 
of Mitigation Policies
The stringency of mitigation policies varies greatly by country, sector 
and policy (Box 13.9). Stringency can be increased through sequential 
changes to policies (Pahle et al. 2018). 
Estimates of the effective carbon price (as an estimate of overall 
stringency across policy instruments) differ greatly between countries 
and sectors (World Bank 2021a). Countries with higher overall 
effective carbon prices tend to have lower carbon intensity of energy 
supply and lower emissions intensity of the economy, as shown in 
an analysis of 42 G20 and OECD countries (OECD 2018). The carbon 
price that prevails under a carbon tax or ETS is not directly a measure 
of policy stringency across an economy, as the carbon prices typically 
only cover a share of total emissions, and rebates or free allowance 
allocations can limit effectiveness (OECD 2018). At low emissions 
prices, mitigation incentives are small; as of April 2021, seventeen 
Figure 13.4 | Share of countries that adopted different policy instruments in different sectors, 2000–2020 (three year moving average).  Source: reproduced 
with permission from Nascimento et al. (2021).
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
jurisdictions with a carbon pricing policy had a tax rate or allowance 
price less than USD5 per tCO 2 (World Bank 2021a). 
Other policies, such as fossil fuel subsidies, may provide incentives to 
increase emissions thus limiting the effectiveness of the mitigation 
policy (Section 13.6.3.6). Those effects may be complex and difficult 
to identify. In most countries trade policy provides an implicit 
subsidy to CO 2 emissions (Shapiro 2020). The analysis of emissions 
from energy use in buildings in Chapter 9 illustrates the factors that 
support and counteract mitigation policies.
Furthermore, emissions pricing policies encourage reduction of 
emissions whose marginal abatement cost is lower than the tax/
allowance price, so they have limited impact on emissions with 
higher abatement costs such as industrial process emissions (Bataille 
et al. 2018a; Davis et al. 2018). EU ETS emission reductions have 
been achieved mainly through implementation of low cost measures 
such as energy efficiency and fuel switching rather than more costly 
industrial process emissions. 
Estimating the overall effectiveness of mitigation policies is 
difficult because of the need to identify which observed changes 
in emissions and their drivers are attributable to policy effort and 
which to other factors. Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 14 brings together several lines of evidence to indicate that mitigation policies 
have had a discernible impact on mitigation for specific countries, 
sectors and technologies and led to avoided global emissions to 
date by several billion tonnes CO 2-eq annually (medium evidence, 
medium agreement). 
13.6.2 Evaluation Criteria
Policy evaluation is a  ‘careful, retrospective assessment of merit, 
worth and value of the administration, output and outcomes of 
government interventions’ (Vedung 2005). The inherent complexity 
of climate mitigation policies calls for the application of multiple 
criteria, and reflexiveness of analysis with regard to governments’ 
and societies’ objectives for policies (Huitema et al. 2011).
Evaluation of climate mitigation policy tends to focus on the 
environmental effectiveness and economic efficiency or cost-
effectiveness of GHG mitigation policies, with distributional 
equity sometimes as an additional criterion. In policy design and 
implementation there is rising interest in co-benefits and side-
effects of climate policies, as well as institutional requirements for 
implementation and the potential of policies to have transformative 
effect on systems. Table 13.2 elaborates. Box 13.9 | Comparing the Stringency of Mitigation Policies
Comparing the stringency of policies over time or across jurisdictions is very challenging and there is no single widely accepted metric 
or methodology (Compston and Bailey 2016; Burck et al. 2019; Tosun and Schnepf 2020; Fekete et al. 2021). Policies are also assessed 
for their estimated effect on emissions, however, this requires estimation of a counterfactual baseline and isolation of other effects 
(Cross-Chapter Box 10 in Chapter 14). Economic instruments can be compared on the basis of their price or cost per tCO 2-eq. Even 
that is fraught with complexity in the context of different definitions and estimations for fossil fuel taxes and subsidies. For non-price 
policies an implicit or equivalent carbon price can be estimated. Factors such as the tax treatment of compliance costs can increase 
complexity. Accounting for the combined effect of overlapping policies presents additional challenges and such estimates are subject 
to numerous limitations.
Table 13.2 | Criteria for evaluation and assessment of policy instruments and packages.
Criterion Description
Environmental 
effectiveness Reducing GHG emissions is the primary goal of mitigation policies and therefore a fundamental criterion in evaluation. Environmental effectiveness has 
temporal and spatial dimensions. 
Economic effectiveness Climate change mitigation policies usually carry economic costs, and/or bring economic benefits other than through avoided future climate change. 
Economic effectiveness requires minimising costs and maximising benefits. 
Distributional effects The costs and benefits of policies are usually distributed unequally among different groups within a society (Zachmann et al. 2018), for example between 
industry, consumers, taxpayers; poor and rich households; different industries; different regions and countries. Policy design affects distributional effects, 
and equity can be taken into account in policy design in order to achieve political support for climate policies (Baranzini et al. 2017). 
Co-benefits, negative 
side-effects Climate change mitigation policies can have effects on other objectives, either positive co-benefits (Mayrhofer and Gupta 2016; Karlsson et al. 2020) or 
negative side-effects. Conversely, impacts on emissions can arise as side-effects of other policies. There can be various interactions between climate change 
mitigation and the Sustainable Development Goals (Liu et al. 2019).
Institutional 
requirements Effective implementation of policies requires that specific institutional prerequisites are met. These include effective monitoring of activities or emissions 
and enforcement, and institutional structures for the design, oversight and revision and updating of policies. Requirements differ between policy 
instruments. a separate consideration is the overall feasibility of a policy within a jurisdiction, including political feasibility (Jewell and Cherp 2020).
Transformative potential Transformational change is a process that involves profound change resulting in fundamentally different structures (Nalau and Handmer 2015), or 
a substantial shift in a system’s underlying structure (Hermwille et al. 2015). Climate change mitigation policies can be seen has having transformative 
potential if they can fundamentally change emissions trajectories, or facilitate technologies, practices or products with far lower emissions. 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Not all criteria are applicable to all instruments or in all circumstances 
and the relative importance of different criteria depend on the 
objectives in the specific the context. a  given policy instrument 
may score highly on only some assessment criteria. In practice, 
the empirical evidence seldom exists for assessment of a  policy 
instrument across all criteria. 
13.6.3 Economic Instruments
Economic instruments, including carbon taxes, emissions trading 
systems (ETS), purchases of emission reduction credits, subsidies for 
energy efficiency, renewables and research and development and 
fossil fuel subsidy removal, provide a  financial incentive to reduce 
emissions. Pricing instruments, especially ETS and carbon taxes, 
have become more prevalent in recent years (Section 13.6.1). They 
have proven effective in promoting implementation of the low-cost 
emissions reductions, and practical experience has driven progress in 
market mechanism design (robust evidence, high agreement). 
13.6.3.1 Carbon Taxes
A carbon tax is a charge on carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases 
imposed on specified emitters or products. In practice features such 
as exemptions and multiple rates can lead to debate as to whether 
a specific tax is a carbon tax (Haites 2018). While other taxes can also 
reduce emissions by increasing the price of GHG emitting products, 
the result may be inefficient unless the tax rate is proportional to the 
emissions intensity. a tax on value of fossil fuels, for example, could 
raise the price on natural gas more than the price of coal, and hence 
increase emissions if the resulting substitution towards coal were to 
outweigh reductions in energy use. 
As of April 2021, 27 carbon taxes had been implemented by national 
governments, mostly in Europe (World Bank 2021a). Most of the 
taxes apply to fossil fuels used for transportation and heating and 
cover between 3% and 79% of the jurisdiction’s emissions. Several 
countries also tax F-gases. Tax rates vary widely from less than USD1 
to over USD137 per tCO 2-eq. a  few jurisdictions lowered existing 
fuel taxes when they implemented the carbon tax, thus reducing the 
effective tax rate (OECD 2021a). How the tax revenue is used varies 
widely by jurisdiction. 
Carbon taxes tend to garner the least public support among possible 
mitigation policy options (Rhodes et al. 2017; Rabe 2018; Maestre-
Andrés et al. 2019; Criqui et al. 2019) although some regulations also 
meet with opposition (Attari et al. 2009). Policymakers sometimes 
use the revenue to build support for the tax, allocating some to 
address regressivity, to address competitiveness claims by industry, 
to reduce the economic cost by lowering existing taxes, and to fund 
environmental projects (Gavard et al. 2018; Klenert et al. 2018; 
Levi et al. 2020). 
Carbon tax rates can be adjusted for inflation, increases in income, 
the effects of technological change, changing policy ambition, or 

jurisdictions have not increased their tax rates annually and some 
scheduled tax increases have not been implemented (Haites 
et al. 2018). Predictability of future tax rates helps improve economic 
performance (Bosetti and Victor 2011; Brunner et al. 2012). 
Uncertainty about the future existence of a carbon price can hinder 
investment (Jotzo et al. 2012) and uncertainty about future price 
levels can increase the resource costs of carbon pricing (Aldy and 
Armitage 2020).
13.6.3.2 Emission Trading Systems
The most common ETS design  – cap-and-trade  – sets a  limit on 
aggregate GHG emissions by specified sources, distributes tradable 
allowances approximately equal to the limit, and requires regulated 
emitters to submit allowances equal to their verified emissions. The 
price of allowances is determined by the market, except in cases 
where government determined price floors or ceilings apply. 
ETSs for GHGs were in place in 38 countries as of April 2021 
(World Bank 2021a). The EU ETS, which covers 30 countries, was 
recently displaced by China’s national ETS as the largest. ETSs tend 
to cover emissions by large industrial and electricity generating 
facilities.2 Allowance prices as of April 1, 2021 ranged from just 
over USD1 to USD50, and coverage between 9% and 80% of the 
jurisdiction’s emissions. 
Multiple regional pilot ETSs with different designs have been 
implemented in China since 2013 to provide input to the design of 
a national system that is to become the world’s largest ETS (Jotzo 
et al. 2018; Qian et al. 2018; Stoerk et al. 2019). Assessments have 
identified potential improvements to emissions reporting procedures 
(Zhang et al. 2019) and the pilot ETS designs (Deng et al. 2018). China’s 
national ETS covering over 2200 heat and power plants with annual 
emissions of about 4 GtCO 2took effect in 2021 (World Bank 2021a). 
All of the ETSs for which data are available have accumulated surplus 
allowances which reduces their effectiveness (Haites 2018). Surplus 
allowances indicate that the caps set earlier were not stringent 
relative to emissions trends. Most of those ETSs have implemented 
measures to reduce the surplus including removal/cancellation of 
allowances and more rapid reduction of the cap. Several ETSs have 
adopted mechanisms to remove excess allowances from the market 
when supply is abundant and release additional allowances into the 
market when the supply is limited, such as the EU ‘market stability 
reserve’ (Hepburn et al. 2016; Bruninx et al. 2020). Initial indications 
are that this mechanism is at least partially successful in stabilising 
prices in response to short term disruptions such as the COVID-19 
economic shock (Gerlagh et al. 2020; Bocklet et al. 2019). 
Some ETS also include provisions to limit the range of market prices, 
making them ‘hybrids’ (Pizer 2002). a price floor assures a minimum 
level of policy effect if demand for allowances is low relative to the 
ETS emissions cap. It is usually implemented through a minimum price 
at auction, as for example in California’s ETS (Borenstein et al. 2019). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
a price ceiling allows the government to issue unlimited additional 
allowances at a pre-determined price to limit the maximum cost of 
mitigation. Price ceilings have not been activated to date. 
13.6.3.3 Evaluation of Carbon Pricing Experience
A carbon tax or GHG ETS increases the prices of emissions intensive 
goods thus creating incentives to reduce emissions (Stavins 2019) for 
a comparison of a tax and ETS). The principal advantage of a pricing 
policy is that it promotes implementation of low-cost reductions; for 
a carbon tax, reductions whose cost per tCO 2-eq reduced is lower 
than the tax and for an ETS the lowest cost (per tCO 2-eq) reductions 
sufficient to meet the cap. Both a tax and an ETS can be designed 
to limit adverse economic impacts on regulated sources and 
emissions leakage.
The corresponding limitations of pricing policies are that they have 
limited impact on adoption of mitigation measures when decisions 
are not sensitive to prices and do not encourage adoption of higher 
cost mitigation measures. Their effectiveness in influencing long-term 
investments depends on the expectation that the policy will continue 
and expectations related to future tax rates or allowance prices 
(Brunner et al. 2012). Other policies can be used in combination with 
carbon pricing to address these limitations.
The number of pricing policies has increased steadily and covered 
21.5% of global GHG emissions in 2020 (World Bank 2021a). Effective 
coverage is lower because virtually all jurisdictions with a  pricing 
policy have other policies that affect some of the same emissions. For 
example, a few jurisdictions reduced existing fuel taxes when they 
introduced their carbon tax thus reducing the effective tax rate, and 
many jurisdictions have two or more pricing policies 
Environmental effectiveness and co-benefits
There is abundant evidence that carbon pricing policies reduce 
emissions. Statistical studies of emissions trends in jurisdictions with 
and without carbon pricing find a significant impact after controlling 
for other policies and structural factors (Best et al. 2020; Rafaty et al. 
2020). Numerous assessments of specific policies, especially the EU 
ETS and the British Columbia carbon tax, conclude that most have 
reduced emissions (robust evidence, high agreement) (Narassimhan 
et al. 2018; Haites et al. 2018; Aydin and Esen 2018; Pretis 2019; 
Andersson 2019; FSR Climate 2019; Metcalf and Stock 2020; Rafaty 
et al. 2020; Bayer and Aklin 2020; Diaz et al. 2020; Green 2021; 
Arimura and Abe 2021). 
Estimating the emission reductions due to a specific policy is difficult 
due to the effects of overlapping policies and exogenous factors such 
as fossil fuel price changes and economic conditions. Studies that 
attempt to attribute a  share of the reductions achieved to the EU 
ETS place its contribution at 3–25% (FSR Climate 2019; Bayer and 
Aklin 2020; Chèze et al. 2020). The relationship between a carbon tax 
and the resulting emission reductions is complex and is influenced 
by changes in fossil fuel prices, changes in fossil fuel taxes, and other 
mitigation policies (Aydin and Esen 2018). But the effectiveness of a  carbon tax generally is higher in countries where it constitutes 
a large part of the fossil fuel price (Andersson 2019). 
Few of the world’s carbon prices are at a level consistent with various 
estimates of the carbon price needed to meet the Paris Agreement 
goals. In modelling of mitigation pathways that limit warming to 
2°C (>50%)(Section  3.6.1) marginal abatement costs of carbon in 


(>50%) with no or limited overshoot (Section  3.6). One synthesis 
study estimates necessary prices at USD40–80 per tCO 2 by 2020 
(High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices 2017). Only a  small 
minority of carbon pricing schemes in 2021 had prices above USD40 
per tCO 2, and all of these were in European jurisdictions (World Bank 
2021a). Most carbon pricing systems apply only to some share of 
the total emissions in a jurisdiction, so the headline carbon price is 
higher than the average carbon price that applies across an economy 
(World Bank 2021a). 
Where ETS or carbon taxes exist, they apply to different proportions 
of the jurisdiction’s greenhouse gas emissions. The share of emissions 
covered by ETSs in 2020 varied widely, ranged from 9% (Canada) 
to 80% (California) while the share of emissions covered by carbon 
taxes ranged from 3% (Latvia and Spain) to 80% (South Africa) 
(World Bank 2021a).Where carbon pricing policies are effective in 
reducing GHG emissions, they usually also generate co-benefits 
including better air quality. For example, a Chinese study of air quality 
benefits from lower fossil fuel use under carbon pricing suggests that 
prospective health co-benefits would partially or fully offset the cost 
of the carbon policy (Li et al. 2018). Depending upon the jurisdiction 
(for example, if there are fossil fuel subsidies) carbon pricing could 
also reduce the economic distortions of fossil fuel subsidies, improve 
energy security through greater reliance on local energy sources and 
reduce exposure to fossil fuel market volatility. Substantial carbon 
prices would be in the domestic self-interest of many countries if 
co-benefits were fully factored in (Parry et al. 2015).
Economic effectiveness
Economic theory suggests that carbon pricing policies are on the 
whole more cost effective than regulations or subsidies at reducing 
emissions (Gugler et al. 2021). Any mitigation policy imposes costs on 
the regulated entities. In some cases entities may be able to recover 
some or all of the costs through higher prices (Neuhoff and Ritz 2019; 
Cludius et al. 2020). International competition from less stringently 
regulated firms limits the ability of emissions-intensive, trade-
exposed (EITE) firms to raise their prices. Thus, a unilateral mitigation 
policy creates a risk of adverse economic impacts, including loss of 
sales, employment, profits, for such firms and associated emissions 
leakage (Section 13.6.6.1).
Pricing policies can be designed to minimise these risks; free 
allowances can be issued to EITE participants in an ETS and taxes 
can provide exemptions or rebates. An extensive ex post literature 
finds no statistically significant adverse impacts on competitiveness 
or leakage (13.6.6.1). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13An ex post analysis of European carbon taxes finds no robust 
evidence of a negative effect on employment or GDP growth (Metcalf 
and Stock 2020). The British Columbia carbon tax led to a  small 
net increase in employment (Yamazaki 2017) with no significant 
negative impacts on GDP possibly due to full recycling of the tax 
revenue (Bernard and Kichian 2021). Few carbon taxes apply to EITE 
sources (Timilsina 2018), so competitiveness impacts usually are not 
a particular concern. 
Government revenue generated by carbon pricing policies globally 
was approximately 53 billion USD in 2020 split almost evenly 
between carbon taxes and ETS allowance sales (World Bank 2021). 
Revenue raised though carbon pricing is generally considered 
a relatively efficient form of taxation and a large share of revenue 
enters general government budgets (Postic and Fetet 2020). Some of 
the revenue is returned to emitters or earmarked for environmental 
purposes. Allowance allocation and revenue spending measures have 
been used to create public support for many carbon pricing policies 
including at every major reform stage of the EU ETS (Klenert et al. 
2018; Dorsch et al. 2020) (Box 5.11).
Distributional effects 
The most commonly studied distributional impact is the direct impact 
of a carbon tax on household income. Typically it is regressive; the tax 
induced increase in energy expenditures represents a larger share of 
household income for lower income households (Grainger and Kolstad 
2010; Timilsina 2018; Dorband et al. 2019; Ohlendorf et al. 2021). 
Governments can rebate part or all of the revenue to low-income 
households, or implement other changes to taxation and transfer 
systems to achieve desired distributional outcomes (Jacobs and van 
der Ploeg 2019; Saelim 2019; Sallee 2019) (Box 5.11). The full impact 
of the tax – after any distribution of tax revenue to households and 
typically adverse effects on investors – generally is less regressive or 
progressive (Williams III et al. 2015; Goulder et al. 2019). Where the 
tax revenue is treated as general revenue the government relies on 
existing income redistribution policies (such as income taxes) and 
social safety net programmes to address the distributional impacts.
Carbon taxes on fossil fuels have effects similar to the removal of 
fossil fuel subsidies (Ohlendorf et al. 2021) (Section 13.6.3.6). Even 
if a carbon tax is progressive it increases prices for fuels, electricity, 
transport, food and other goods and services that adversely affect 
the most economically vulnerable. Redistribution of tax revenue 
is critical to address the adverse impacts on low-income groups 
(Dorband et al. 2019) (Box 5.11). In countries with a limited capacity 
to collect taxes and distribute revenues to low-income households, 
such as some developing countries, carbon taxes may have greater 
distributional consequences.
Distributional effects have generally not been a significant issue for 
ETSs. Equity for industrial participants typically is addressed through 
free allocation of allowances. Impacts on household incomes, 
with the exception of electricity prices, are too small or indirect to 
be a  concern. Some systems are designed to limit electricity price 
increases (Petek 2020) or use some revenue for bill assistance to low-
income households (RGGI 2019). Technological change
Carbon pricing, especially an ETS that covers industrial sources, 
stimulates technological change by participants and others (Calel 
and Dechezleprêtre 2016; FSR Climate 2019; van den Bergh and 
Savin 2021) (Section 13.6.6.3 and Chapter 16). The purpose of pricing 
policies is to encourage implementation of the lowest cost mitigation 
measures. Pricing policies therefore are more likely to stimulate 
quick, low cost innovation such as fuel switching and energy 
efficiency, rather than long term, costly technology development 
such as renewable energy or industrial process technologies (Calel 
2020; Lilliestam et al. 2021). To encourage long-term technology 
development carbon pricing policies need to be complemented by 
other mitigation and research and development (R&D) policies. 
13.6.3.4 Offset Credits
Offset credits are voluntary GHG emission reductions for which 
tradable credits are issued by a  supervisory body (Michaelowa 
et al. 2019b). a buyer can use purchased credits to offset an equal 
quantity of its emissions. In a voluntary market governments, firms 
and individuals purchase credits to offset emissions generated by 
their actions, such as air travel. a compliance market al.ows specified 
offset credits to be used for compliance with mitigation policies, 
especially ETSs, carbon taxes and low-carbon fuel standards. (Newell 
et al. 2013; Bento et al. 2016; Michaelowa et al. 2019a).
When used for compliance, governments typically specify 
a maximum quantity of offset credits that can be used, as well as 
the types of emission reduction actions, the project start dates and 
the geographic regions eligible credits. Initially, the EU ETS, Swiss 
ETS and New Zealand ETS accepted credits issued under the Kyoto 
Protocol (Chapter 14), but they terminated or severely constrained 
the quantity of international credits allowed for compliance use after 

A key question for any offset credit is whether the emission 
reductions are ‘additional’: reductions that only happen because of 
the offset credit payment (Greiner and Michaelowa 2003; Millard-
Ball and Ortolano 2010; van Benthem and Kerr 2013; Burke 2016; 
Bento et al. 2016). To assess additionality and to determine the 
quantity of credits to be issued, regulators develop methodologies 
to estimate baseline (business-as-usual) emissions in the absence of 
offset payments (Newell et al. 2013; Bento et al. 2016). Credits are 
issued for the difference between the baseline and actual emissions 
with adjustments for possible emissions increases outside the project 
boundary (Rosendahl and Strand 2011). Some research suggests that 
procedural and measurement advances can significantly reduce the 
risk of severe non-additionality (Mason and Plantinga 2013; Bento 
et al. 2016; Michaelowa et al. 2019a). 
13.6.3.5 Subsidies for Mitigation
Subsidies for mitigation encourage individuals and firms to invest 
in assets that reduce emissions, changes in processes or innovation. 
Subsidies have been used to improve energy efficiency, encourage 
the uptake of renewable energy and other sector-specific emissions 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
saving options (Chapters  6 to 11), and to promote innovation. 
Targeted subsidies can achieve specific mitigation goals yet have 
intrinsically narrower coverage than more broad-based pricing 
instruments. Subsidies are often used not only to achieve emissions 
reductions but to address market imperfections or to achieve 
distributional or strategic objectives. Subsidies are often used 
alongside or in combination with other policy instruments, and are 
provided at widely differing cost per unit of emissions reduced. 
Governments routinely provide direct funding for basic research, 
subsidies for R&D to private companies, and co-funding of research and 
deployment with industry (Dzonzi-Undi and Li 2016). Research 
subsidies have been found to be positively correlated with green 
product innovation in a  study in Germany, Switzerland and Austria 
(Stucki et al. 2018). Government subsidies for R&D have been found to 
greatly increase the green innovation performance of energy intensive 
firms in China (Bai et al. 2019). For more detail see Chapter 16. 
Subsidies of different forms are often provided for emissions savings 
investments to businesses and for the retrofit of buildings for energy 
efficiency. Emissions reductions from energy efficiencies can often 
be achieved at low cost, but evidence for some schemes suggests 
lower effectiveness in emissions reductions than expected ex ante 
(Fowlie et al. 2018; Valentová et al. 2019). Tax credits can be used to 
encourage firms to produce or invest in low-carbon emission energy 
and low-emission equipment. Investment subsidies have been found 
to be more effective in reducing costs and uncertainties in solar 
energy technologies than production subsidies (Flowers et al. 2016). 
Subsidies have been provided extensively and in many countries for 
the deployment of household rooftop solar systems, and increasingly 
also for commercial scale renewable energy projects, typically using 
‘feed-in tariffs’ that provide a payment for electricity generated above 
the market price (Pyrgou et al. 2016). Such schemes have  proven 
effective in deploying renewable energy, but lock-in subsidies for long 
periods of time. In some cases they provide subsidies at higher levels 
than would be required to motivate deployment (del Río and Linares 
2014). High levels of net subsidies have been shown to diminish 
incentives for optimal siting of renewable energy installations 
(Penasco et al. 2019).
A variant of subsidies for deployment of renewable energy are 
auctioned feed-in tariffs or auctioned contracts-for-difference, where 
commercial providers bid in a competitive process. Auctions typically 
lead to lower price premiums (Eberhard and Kåberger 2016; Roberts 
2020) but efficient outcomes depend on auction design and market 
structure (Grashof et al. 2020), although an emergent literature also 
questions whether spread of auctions is due to performance or the 
dynamics of the policy formulation process (Fitch-Roy et al. 2019b; 
Grashof et al. 2020; Grashof 2021). The prequalification requirements 
or the assessment criteria in the auctions sometimes also include 
local co-benefits such as local economic diversification (Buckman 
et al. 2019; White et al. 2021).
Support for rollout clean technologies at high prices can be 
economically beneficial in the long run if costs are reduced greatly 
as a function of deployment (Newbery 2018). Deployment support, much of it in the form of feed-in tariffs in Germany, enabled the 
scaling up of the global solar photovoltaic industry and attendant 
large reductions in production costs that by 2020 made solar power 
cost competitive with fossil fuels (Buchholz et al. 2019). There is also 
evidence for increased innovation activity as a result of solar feed-in 
tariffs (Böhringer et al. 2017b). 
Many governments have also provided subsidies for the purchase 
of electric vehicles, including with strong effect in China (Ma et al. 
2017), Norway (Baldursson et al. 2021) and other countries, and 
sometimes at relatively high rates (Kong and Hardman 2019).
13.6.3.6 Removal of Fossil Fuel Subsidies
Many governments subsidise fossil fuel consumption and/or 
production through a variety of mechanisms (Burniaux and Chateau 
2014) (Figure  13.5). Different approaches exist to defining the 
scope and estimating the magnitude of fossil fuel subsidies (Koplow 
2018), and all involve estimates, so the magnitudes are uncertain. 
Rationalising inefficient fossil fuel subsidies is one of the indicators to 
measure progress toward Sustainable Development Goal 12: Ensure 
sustainable consumption and production patterns (UNEP 2019a). 
Consumption subsidies represent approximately 70% of the total. 
Most of the subsidies go to petroleum, which accounts for roughly 
50% of the consumption subsidies and 75% of the production 
subsidies (IEA 2020; OECD 2020). Much of the variation in the 
consumption subsidies is due to fluctuations in the world price of oil 
which is used as the reference price. 
Reducing fossil fuel subsidies would lower CO 2 emissions, 
increase government revenues (Jakob et al. 2015; Dennis 2016; 
Gass and Echeverria 2017; Rentschler and Bazilian 2017; Monasterolo 
and  Raberto 2019), improve macroeconomic performance 
(Monasterolo  and Raberto 2019), and yield other environmental 
and sustainable development benefits (robust evidence,  medium 
agreement) (Jakob et al. 2015; Rentschler and Bazilian 2017; Solarin 
2020). The benefits of gasoline subsidies in developing countries 
accrue mainly to higher income groups, so subsidy reduction usually 
will reduce inequality (Coady et al. 2015; Dennis 2016; Monasterolo 
and Raberto 2019; Labeaga et al. 2021). Some subsidies, like tiered 
electricity rates, benefit low-income groups. Reductions of broad 
subsidies lead to price increases for fuels, electricity, transport, food and 
other goods and services that adversely affect the most economically 
vulnerable (Coady et al. 2015; Zeng and Chen 2016; Rentschler and 
Bazilian 2017). Distributing some of the revenue saved can mitigate 
the adverse economic impacts on low-income groups (Dennis 2016; 
Zeng and Chen 2016; Labeaga et al. 2021; Schaffitzel et al. 2020). 
The emissions reduction that could be achieved from fossil fuel subsidy 
removal depends on the specific context such as magnitude and nature 
of subsidies, energy prices and demand elasticities, and how the fiscal 
savings from reduced subsidies are used. Modelling studies of global 
fossil fuel subsidy removal result in projected emission reductions 
of between 1% and 10% by 2030 (Delpiazzo et al. 2015; IEA 2015; 
Jewell et al. 2018; IISD 2019) and between 6.4% and 8.2% by 2050 
(Schwanitz et al. 2014; Burniaux and Chateau 2014). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13An extensive literature documents the difficulties of phasing out 
fossil fuel subsidies (Schmidt et al. 2017; Gass and Echeverria 2017; 
Skovgaard and van Asselt 2018; Kyle 2018; Perry 2020; Gençsü et al. 
2020). Fossil fuel industries lobby to maintain producer subsidies and 
consumers protest if they are adversely affected by subsidy reductions 
(Fouquet 2016; Coxhead and Grainger 2018). Yemen (2005 and 2014), 
Cameroon (2008), Bolivia (2010), Nigeria (2012), Ecuador (2019) 
all abandoned subsidy reform attempts following public protests 
(Rentschler and Bazilian 2017; Mahdavi et al. 2020). Indonesia is an 
example where fossil fuel subsidy removal was successful, helped by 
social assistance programmes and a communication effort about the 
benefits of reform (Chelminski 2018; Burke and Kurniawati 2018). 
To-date instances of fossil fuel subsidy reform or removal have 
been driven largely by national fiscal and economic considerations 
(Skovgaard and van Asselt 2019).
13.6.4 Regulatory Instruments
Regulatory instruments are applied by governments to cause the 
adoption of desired processes, technologies, products (including 
energy products) or outcomes (including emission levels). Failure to 
comply incurs financial penalties and/or legal sanctions. Regulatory 
instruments range from performance standards, which prescribe 
compliance outcomes – and in some cases allow flexibility to achieve 
compliance, including the trading of credits  – to more prescriptive 
technology-specific standards, also known as command-and-control 
regulation. Regulatory instruments play an important role to achieve 
specific mitigation outcomes in sectoral applications (robust evidence, 
high agreement). Mitigation by regulation often enjoys greater political 
support but tends to be more economically costly than mitigation by 
pricing instruments (robust evidence,  medium agreement).13.6.4.1 Performance Standards, Including Tradable Credits
Performance standards grant regulated entities freedom to choose 
the technologies and methods to reach a general objective, such as 
a minimum market share of zero-emission vehicles or of renewable 
electricity, or a maximum emissions intensity of electricity generated. 
Tradable performance standards allow regulated entities to trade 
compliance achievement credits; under-performers can buy surplus 
credits from over-performers thereby reducing the aggregate cost of 
compliance (Fischer 2008).
Tradable performance standards have been applied to numerous 
sectors including electricity generation, personal vehicles, building 
energy efficiency, appliances, and large industry. An important 
application is Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS) for electricity 
supply, which require that a  minimum percentage of electricity is 
generated from specified renewable sources sometimes including 
nuclear and fossil fuels with CCS when referred to as a clean electricity 
standard (Young and Bistline 2018) (Chapter 6). This creates a price 
incentive to invest in renewable generation capacity. Such incentives 
can equivalently be created through feed-in tariffs, a form of subsidy 
(Section 13.6.3) and some jurisdictions have had both instruments 
(Matsumoto et al. 2017). RPS can differ in features and stringency, 
and are in operation in many countries and sub-national jurisdictions, 
including a majority of US states (Carley et al. 2018). 
Vehicle emissions standards are a  common form of performance 
standard with flexibility (Chapter  9). a  corporate fuel efficiency 
standard specifies an average energy use and/or GHG emissions 
per kilometre travelled for vehicles sold by a manufacturer. Another 
version of this policy, the zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) standard, 
requires vehicle sellers to achieve minimum requirements for sales IMF IEA OECD IEA+OECD0100200300400500600700800900

Figure 13.5 | Total fossil fuel subsidies, 2010–2019, in USD billion (USD2021 for IMF, USD2019 for others).  Source: data from OECD (2020) (43 countries, mainly 
production subsidies), IEA (2020) (40 countries, mainly consumption subsidies), IMF (Parry et al. 2021; explicit subsidies for all countries). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
of zero-emission vehicles (Bhardwaj et al. 2020). Both instruments 
allow manufacturers to use tradable credits to achieve compliance. 
Low-carbon fuel standards (LCFS), which set an average life-cycle 
carbon intensity for energy that declines over time, are another 
example. LCFS are in place in many different jurisdictions (Chapter 9) 
and have been applied to petroleum products, natural gas, hydrogen 
and electricity (Yeh et al. 2016). An LCFS allows regulated entities 
to trade credits creating the potential for high carbon intensity fuel 
suppliers to cross-subsidise low-carbon intensity transport energy 
providers including low-carbon biofuels, hydrogen and electricity 
(Axsen et al. 2020). 
Trading and other flexibility mechanisms improve the economic 
efficiency of standards by harmonising the marginal abatement 
costs among companies or installations subject to the standard. 
Nevertheless tradable performance standards are less economically 
efficient in achieving emissions reductions than carbon pricing, 
sometimes by a significant amount (Giraudet and Quirion 2008; Chen 
et al. 2014; Holland et al. 2015; Fox et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018).
13.6.4.2 Technology Standards
Technology standards take a more prescriptive approach by requiring 
a  specific technology, process or product. They typically take one 
of three forms: requirements for specific pollution abatement 
technologies; requirements for specific production methods; or 
requirements for specific goods such as energy efficient appliances. 
They can also take the form of phase-out mandates, as applied for 
example to planned bans of internal combustion engines for road 
transport (Bhagavathy and McCulloch 2020), coal use; for example, 
Germany’s decisions to phase out coal (Oei et al. 2020), and some 
industry processes and products, for example, hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs) and use of sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6) in some products (see 
Box 13.10 on non-CO 2 gases). Technology standards are also referred 
to as command-and-control standards, prescriptive standards, or 
design standards. 
Technology standards are a common climate policy particularly at the 
sector level (Chapters 6–11). Technology standards tend to score lower 
in terms of economic efficiency than carbon pricing and performance 
standards (Besanko 1987). But they may be the best instrument for 
situations where decisions are not very responsive to price signals 
such as consumer choices related to energy efficiency and recycling 
and decisions relating to urban land use and infrastructure choices. 
By mandating specific compliance pathways, technology standards 
risk locking-in a  high-cost pathway when lower cost options are 
available or may emerge through market incentives and innovation (Raff and Walter 2020). Furthermore, standards may require high-
cost GHG reductions in one sector while missing low-cost options 
in another sector. Technology standards can also stifle innovation by 
blocking alternative technologies from entering the market (Sachs 
2012). Benefits of technology standards include their potential to 
achieve emission reductions in a  relatively short time frame and 
that their effectiveness can be estimated with some confidence 
(Montgomery et al. 2019). 
13.6.4.3 Performance of Regulatory Instruments
Regulatory policy instruments tend to be more economically costly 
than pricing instruments, as explained above. However, regulatory 
policies may be preferred for other reasons.
In some cases, regulatory policy can elicit greater political support 
than pricing policy (Tobler et al. 2012; Lam 2015; Drews and van 
den Bergh 2016). For example, USA citizens have expressed more 
support for flexible regulation like the RPS than for carbon taxes 
(Rabe 2018). And a survey in British Columbia a few years after the 
simultaneous implementation of a carbon tax and two regulations – 
the LCFS and a clean electricity standard – found much less strong 
opposition to the regulations, even after being informed that they 
were costlier to consumers (Rhodes et al. 2017). The degree of public 
support for regulations depends, however, on the type of regulation, 
as outright technology prohibitions can be unpopular (Attari et al. 
2009; Cherry et al. 2012).
In comparison to economic instruments, regulatory policies tend to 
cause greater cost of living increases in percentage terms for lower 
income consumers – called policy regressivity (Levinson 2019; Davis 
and Knittel 2019). And unlike carbon taxes, regulations do not generate 
revenues that can be used to compensate lower income groups.
A renewable energy procurement obligation in South Africa 
successfully required local hiring with perceived positive results 
(Walwyn and Brent 2015; Pahle et al. 2016), a  clean energy 
regulation in Korea was perceived to provide greater employment 
opportunities (Lee 2017), and a UK obligation on energy companies 
to provide energy retrofits to low-income households improved 
energy affordability according to participants (Elsharkawy and 
Rutherford 2018). 
From an energy system transformation perspective, technology 
standards, including phase-out mandates, have particular promise 
to achieve profound change in specific sectors and technologies 
(Tvinnereim and Mehling 2018). As such policies change the 
technologies available in the market, then economic instruments can 
also have a greater effect (Pahle et al. 2018). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Box 13.10 | Policies to Limit Emissions of Non-CO 2 Gases
Non-CO 2 gases weighted by their 100-year GWPs represent approximately 25% of global GHG emissions, of which methane (CH 4) 
accounts for 18%, nitrous oxide (N 2O) 4%, and fluorinated gases (HFCs, PFCs, SF 6 and NF 3) 2% (Minx et al. 2021). Only a small share 
of these emissions are subject to mitigation policies. 
Methane (CH 4). Anthropogenic sources include agriculture, mainly livestock and rice paddies, fossil fuel extraction and processing, 
fuel combustion, some industrial processes, landfills, and wastewater treatment (EPA 2019). Atmospheric measurements indicate that 
methane emissions from fossil fuel production are larger than shown in emissions inventories (Schwietzke et al. 2016). Only a small 
fraction of global CH 4 emissions is regulated. Mitigation policies focus on landfills, coal mines, and oil and gas operations. 
Regulations and incentives to capture and utilise methane from coal seams came into effect in China in 2010 (Tan 2018; Tao et al. 
2019). Inventory data suggest that emissions peaked and began a slow decline after 2010 (Gao et al. 2020) though satellite data 
indicate that China’s methane emissions, largely attributable to coal mining, continued to rise in line with pre-2010 trends (Miller et al. 
2019). Methane emissions from sources including agriculture, waste and industry are included in some offset credit schemes, including 
the CDM and at national level in Australia’s Emissions Reductions Fund (Australian Climate Change Authority 2017) and the Chinese 
Certified Emission Reduction (CCER) scheme (Lo and Cong 2017). 
Nitrous oxide (N 2O). N2O emissions are produced by agricultural soil management, livestock waste management, fossil 
fuel combustion, and adipic acid and nitric acid production (EPA 2019). Most N 2O emissions are not regulated and global emissions 
have been increasing. N 2O emissions by adipic and nitric acid plants in the EU are covered by the ETS (Winiwarter et al. 2018). 
N2O  emissions are included in some offset schemes. China, the United States, Singapore, Egypt, and Russia produce 86% of 
industrial N 2O emissions offering the potential for targeted mitigation action (EPA 2019).
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). Most HFCs are used as substitutes for ozone depleting substances. The Kigali Amendment (KA) to 
the Montreal Protocol will reduce HFC use by 85% by 2047 (UN Environment 2018). To help meet their KA commitments developed 
country parties have been implementing regulations to limit imports, production and exports of HFCs and to limit specific uses of HFCs. 
The EU, for example, issues tradable quota for imports, production and exports of HFCs. Prices of HFCs have increased as expected 
(Kleinschmidt 2020) which has led to smuggling of HFCs into the EU (European Commission 2019b). HFC use has been slightly (1–6%) 
below the limit each year from 2015 through 2018 (EEA 2019). China and India released national cooling action plans in 2019, laying 
out detailed, cross-sectoral plans to provide sustainable, climate friendly, safe and affordable cooling (Dean et al. 2020). 
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF 3). With the exception of SF 6, these gases are 
emitted by industrial activities located in the European Economic Area (EEA) and a limited number (fewer than 30) of other countries. 
Regulations in Europe, Japan and the USA focus on leak reduction as well as collection and reuse of SF 6 from electrical equipment. 
Other uses of SF 6 are banned in Europe (European Union 2014). 
PFCs are generated during the aluminium smelting process if the alumina level in the electrolytic bath falls below critical levels (EPA 
2019). In Europe these emissions are covered by the EU ETS. The industry is eliminating the emissions through improved process 
control and a shift to different production processes. 
The semiconductor industry uses HFCs, PFCs, SF 6 and NF 3 for etching and deposition chamber cleaning (EPA 2019) and has a voluntary 
target of reducing GHG emissions 30% from 2010 by 2020 (World Semiconductor Council 2017). Europe regulates production, import, 
export, destruction and feedstock use of PFCs and SF 6, but not NF 3 (EEA 2019). In addition, fluorinated gases are taxed in Denmark, 
Norway, Slovenia and Spain.
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
In some jurisdictions, the analysis of regulatory instruments is subject 
to an assessment on the basis of a shadow cost of carbon, which 
can influence the choice and design of regulations that affect GHG 
emissions (Box 13.11). 
13.6.5 Other Policy Instruments
A range of other mitigation policy instruments are in use, often 
playing a complementary role to pricing and standards.
13.6.5.1 Transition Support Policies
Effective climate change mitigation can cause economic and social 
disruption where there is transformative change, such as changes 
in energy systems away from fossil fuels (Section 13.9). Transitional 
assistance policies can be aimed to ameliorate effects on consumers, 
workers, communities, corporations or countries (Green and Gambhir 
2020) in order to create broad coalitions of supporters or to limit 
opposition (Vogt-Schilb and Hallegatte 2017). 
13.6.5.2 Information Programmes
Information programmes, including energy efficiency labels, energy 
audits, certification, carbon labelling and information disclosure, are 
in wide use in particular for energy consumption. They can reduce 
GHG emissions by promoting voluntary technology choices and 
behavioural changes by firms and households. 
Energy efficiency labelling is in widespread use, including for 
buildings, and for end users products including cars and appliances. 
Carbon labelling is used for example for food (Camilleri et al. 2019) 
and tourism (Gössling and Buckley 2016). Information measures also 
include specific information systems such as smart electricity meters 
(Zangheri et al. 2019). Chapters 5 and 9 provide detail.
Information programmes can correct for a range of market failures 
related to imperfect information and consumer perceptions (Allcott 
2016). Alongside mandatory standards (13.6.4), information 
programmes can nudge firms and consumers to focus on often 
overlooked operating cost reductions (Carroll et al. 2022). For 
example, consumers who are shown energy efficiency labels on 
average buy more energy efficient appliances than those who are not (Stadelmann and Schubert 2018). Information policies can also 
support the changing of social norms about consumption choices, 
which have been shown to raise public support for pricing and 
regulatory policy instruments (Gössling et al. 2020).
Energy audits provide tailored information about potential energy 
savings and benchmarking of best practices through a network of 
peers. Typical examples include the United States Better Buildings 
Challenge that has provided energy audits to support USA commercial 
and industrial building owners, energy savings have been estimated 
at 18% to 30% (Asensio and Delmas 2017); and Germany’s energy 
audit scheme for SMEs achieving reductions in energy consumption 
of 5–70% (Kluczek and Olszewski 2017).
Consumption-oriented policy instruments seek to reduce GHG 
emissions by changing consumer behaviour directly, via retailers 
or via the supply chain. Aspects that hold promise are technology 
lists, supply chain procurement by leading retailers or business 
associations, a  carbon-intensive materials charge and selected 
infrastructure improvements (Grubb et al. 2020).
The information provided to consumers in labelling programmes is 
often not detailed enough to yield best possible results (Davis and 
Metcalf 2016). Providing information about running costs tends to be 
more effective than providing data on energy use (Damigos et al. 2020). 
Sound implementation of labelling programmes requires appropriate 
calculation methodology and tools, training and public awareness 
(Liang Wong and Krüger 2017). In systems where manufacturers self-
report performance of their products, there tends to be misreporting 
and skewed energy efficiency labelling (Goeschl 2019).
A new form of information programmes are financial accounting 
standards as frameworks to encourage or require companies to 
disclose how the transition risks from shifting to a  low-carbon 
economy and physical climate change impacts may affect their 
business or asset values (Chapter  15). The most prominent such 
standard was issued in 2017 by the Financial Stability Board’s Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. It has found rapid 
uptake among regulators and investors (O’Dwyer and Unerman 2020). 
Traditionally, corporate reporting has treated climate risks in a highly 
varied and often minimal way (Foerster et al. 2017). Disclosure of 
climate-related risks creates incentives for companies to improve Box 13.11 | Shadow Cost of Carbon in Regulatory Analysis
In some jurisdictions, public administrations are required to apply a shadow cost of carbon to regulatory analysis. 
Traditionally, for example in widespread application in the United States, the shadow cost of carbon is calibrated to an estimate of the 
social cost of carbon as an approximation of expected future cumulative economic damage from a unit of greenhouse gas emissions 
(Metcalf and Stock 2017). Social cost of carbon is usually estimated using integrated assessment models and is subject to fundamental 
uncertainties (Pezzey 2019). An alternative approach, used for example in regulatory analysis in the United Kingdom since 2009, is 
to define a carbon price that is thought to be consistent with a particular targeted emissions outcome. This approach also requires 
a number of assumptions, including about future marginal costs of mitigation (Aldy et al. 2021). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13their carbon and climate change exposure, and ultimately regulatory 
standards for climate risk (Eccles and Krzus 2018). Disclosure can 
also reinforce calls for divestment in fossil fuel assets predominantly 
promoted by civil society organisations (Ayling and Gunningham 
2017), raising moral principles and arguments about the financial risks 
inherent in fossil fuel investments (Green 2018; Blondeel et al. 2019).
13.6.5.3 Public Procurement and Investment
National, sub-national and local governments determine many 
aspects of infrastructure planning, fund investment in areas such 
as energy, transport and the built environment, and purchase 
goods and services, including for government administration and 
military provisioning. 
Public procurement rules usually mandate cost effectiveness but only 
in some cases allow or mandate climate change consideration in public 
purchasing, for example in EU public purchasing guidelines (Martinez 
Romera and Caranta 2017). Green procurement for buildings has 
been undertaken in Malaysia (Bohari et al. 2017). a  paper cites 
Taiwan (province of China) green public procurement law, which has 
contributed to reduced emissions intensity (Tsai 2017). In practice, 
awareness and knowledge of ‘green’ public procurement techniques 
and procedures is decisive for climate-friendly procurement (Testa 
et al. 2016). Experiences in low-carbon infrastructure procurement 
point to procedures being tailored to concerns about competition, 
transaction costs and innovation (Kadefors et al. 2020).
Infrastructure investment decisions lock-in high or low emissions 
trajectories over long periods. Low-emissions infrastructure can 
enable or increase productivity of private low-carbon investments 
(Jaumotte et al. 2021) and is typically only a little more expensive 
over its lifetime, but faces additional barriers including higher upfront 
costs, lack of pricing of externalities, or lack of information or aversion 
to novel products (Granoff et al. 2016). In low-income developing 
countries, where infrastructure has historically lagged developed 
countries, some of these hurdles can be exacerbated by overall more 
difficult conditions for public investment (Gurara et al. 2018). 
Governments can also promote low-emissions investments 
through public-private partnerships and government owned ‘green 
banks’ that provide loans on commercial or concessional basis for 
environmentally friendly private sector investments (David and 
Venkatachalam 2019; Ziolo et al. 2019). Public funding or financial 
guarantees such as contracts-for-difference can alleviate financial 
risk in the early stages of technology deployment, creating pathways 
to commercial viability (Bataille 2020). Government provision can also play an important role in economic 
stimulus programs, including as implemented in response to the 
pandemic of 2020–2021. Such programmes can support low-
emissions infrastructure and equipment, and industrial or business 
development (Elkerbout et al. 2020; Hainsch et al. 2020; Barbier 
2020; Hepburn et al. 2020). 
13.6.5.4 Voluntary Agreements
Voluntary Agreements result from negotiations between 
governments and industrial sectors that commit to achieve agreed 
goals (Mundaca and Markandya 2016). When used as part of 
a broader policy framework, they can enhance the cost effectiveness 
of individual firms in attaining emission reductions while pricing 
or regulations drive participation in the agreement (Dawson and 
Segerson 2008). 
Public voluntary programmes, where a  government regulator 
develops programs to which industries and firms may choose to 
participate on a voluntary basis, have been implemented in numerous 
countries. For example, the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency introduced numerous voluntary programmes with industry to 
offer technical support in promoting energy efficiency and emissions 
reductions, among other initiatives (EPA 2017). a European example 
is the EU Ecolabel Award programme (European Commission 2020b). 
Agreements for industrial energy efficiency in Europe (Cornelis 2019) 
and Japan (Wakabayashi and Arimura 2016) have been particularly 
effective in addressing information barriers and for smaller 
companies. The International Civil Aviation Organization’s CORSIA 
scheme (Prussi et al. 2021) is an example of an international industry-
based public voluntary programme.
Voluntary agreements are often implemented in conjunction with 
economic or regulatory instruments, and sometimes are used to 
gain insights ahead of implementation of regulatory standards, as 
in the case of energy efficiency PVPs in South Korea (Seok et al. 
2021). In some cases, industries use voluntary agreements as partial 
fulfilment of a  regulation (Rezessy and Bertoldi 2011; Langpap 
2015). For example, the Netherlands have permitted participating 
industries to be exempt from certain energy taxes and emissions 
regulations (Veum 2018). 
Box 13.12 | Technology and Research and Development Policy
Private businesses tend to under-invest in research and development because of market failures (Geroski 1995), hence there is 
a case for governments to support research and technology development. a range of different policy instruments are used, including 
government funding, preferential tax treatment, intellectual property rules, and policies to support the deployment and diffusion of 
new technologies. Chapter 16 treats innovation policy in-depth. 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
13.6.6 International Interactions of National 
Mitigation Policies
One country’s mitigation policy can impact other countries in various 
ways including changes in their GHG emissions (leakage), creation 
of markets for emission reduction credits, technology development 
and diffusion (spillovers), and reduction in the value of their fossil 
fuel resources. 
13.6.6.1 Leakage Effects
Compliance with a  mitigation policy can affect the emissions of 
foreign sources via several channels over different time scales (Zhang 
and Zhang 2017) (Box 13.13 ). The effects may interact and yield a net 
increase or decrease in emissions. The leakage channel that is of most 
concern to policymakers is adverse international competitiveness 
impacts from domestic climate policies.
In principle, implementation of a  mitigation policy in one country 
creates an incentive to shift production of tradable goods whose 
costs are increased by the policy to other countries with less costly 
emissions limitation policies (Section  12.6.3). Such ‘leakage’ could 
to some extent negate emissions reductions in the first country, 
depending on the relative emissions intensity of production in 
both countries. 
Ex ante modelling studies typically estimate significant leakage for 
unilateral policies to reduce emissions due to production of emissions 
intensive products such as steel, aluminium, and cement (Carbone and Rivers 2017). However, the results are highly dependent on 
assumptions and typically do not reflect policy designs specifically 
aimed at minimising or preventing leakage (Fowlie and Reguant 2018).
Numerous ex post analyses, mainly for the EU ETS, find no evidence 
of any or significant adverse competitiveness impacts and conclude 
that there was consequently no or insignificant leakage (medium 
evidence, medium agreement) (Branger et al. 2016; Haites et al. 2018; 
Koch and Basse Mama 2019; FSR Climate 2019; aus dem Moore et al. 
2019; Venmans et al. 2020; Kuusi et al. 2020; Verde 2020; Borghesi 
et al. 2020). This is attributed to large allocations of free allowances 
to emissions-intensive, trade-exposed sources, relatively low 
allowance prices, the ability of firms in some sectors to pass costs on 
to consumers, energy’s relatively low share of production costs, and 
small but statistically significant effects on innovation (Joltreau and 
Sommerfeld 2019). Few carbon taxes apply to emissions-intensive, 
trade-exposed sources (Timilsina 2018), so competitiveness impacts 
usually are not a particular concern. 
Policies intended to address leakage include a  border 
carbon  adjustment (Ward et al. 2019; Ismer et al. 2020). 
a border carbon adjustment (BCA) imposes costs – a tax or allowance 
purchase obligation  – on imports of carbon-intensive goods 
equivalent to those borne by domestic products possibly mirrored 
by rebates for exports (Böhringer et al. 2012; Fischer and Fox 2012; 
Zhang 2012; Böhringer et al. 2017c) (Chapter 14). A BCA faces the 
practical challenge of determining the carbon content of imports 
(Böhringer et al. 2017a) and the design needs to be consistent with 
WTO rules and other international agreements (Cosbey et al. 2019; 
Box 13.13 | Possible Sources of Leakage
Competitiveness: Mitigation policy raises the costs and product prices of regulated sources which causes production to shift to 
unregulated sources, increasing their emissions.
Fossil fuel channel: Regulated sources reduce their fossil fuel use, which lowers fossil fuel prices and increases consumption and 
associated emissions by unregulated sources.
Land-use channel: Mitigation policies that change land use lead to land use and emissions changes in other jurisdictions (Bastos 
Lima et al. 2019).
Terms of trade effect: Price increases for the products of regulated sources shift consumption to other goods, which raises emissions 
due to the higher output of those goods.
Technology channel: Mitigation policy induces low-carbon innovation, which reduces emissions by sources that adopt the innovations 
that may include unregulated sources (Gerlagh and Kuik 2007).
Abatement resource effect: Regulated sources increase use of clean inputs, which reduces inputs available to unregulated sources 
and so limits their output and emissions (Baylis et al. 2014).
Scale channel: Changes to the output of regulated and unregulated sources affect their emissions intensities so emissions changes 
are not proportional to output changes (Antweiler et al. 2001).
Intertemporal channel: Capital stocks of all sources are fixed initially but change over time affecting the costs, prices, output and 
emissions of regulated and unregulated products. 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Mehling et al. 2019). Model estimates indicate that a BCA reduces 
but does not eliminate leakage (Branger and Quirion 2014). No BCA 
has yet been implemented for international trade although such 
a measure is currently under consideration by some governments.
13.6.6.2 Market for Emission Reduction Credits
A mitigation policy may allow the use of credits issued for emission 
reductions in other countries for compliance purposes (see also 
Section 13.6.3.4 on offset credits and Chapter 14 on international credit 
mechanisms). Creation of international markets for emission reduction 
credits tends to benefit other countries through financial flows in 
return for emissions credit sales (medium evidence,  high agreement). 
The EU, New Zealand and Switzerland allowed participants in their 
emissions trading systems to use credits issued under the Kyoto 
Protocol mechanisms, including the Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM), for compliance. From 2008 through 2014, participants used 
3.76 million imported credits for compliance of which 80% were 
CDM credits (Haites 2016).3 Use of imported credits has fallen to 
very low levels since 2014 (World Bank 2014; Shishlov et al. 2016).4
The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) is the world’s largest 
offset programme (Chapter  14). From 2001 to 2019 over 7500 
projects with projected emission reductions in excess of 8000 MtCO 2-
eq were implemented in 114 developing countries using some 

UNEP DTU Partnership 2020). Credits reflecting over 2000 MtCO 2-eq 
of emission reductions by 3260 projects have been issued. To address 
additionality and other concerns the CDM Executive Board frequently 
updated its approved project methodologies.
13.6.6.3 Technology Spillovers
Mitigation policies stimulate low-carbon R&D by entities subject 
to those policies and by other domestic and foreign entities (FSR 
Climate 2019). Policies to support technology development and 
diffusion tend to have positive spillover effects between countries 
(medium evidence, high agreement) (Section 16.3).
Innovation activity in response to a  mitigation policy varies by 
policy type (Jaffe et al. 2002) and stringency (Johnstone et al. 2012). 
In addition, many governments have policies to stimulate R&D, 
further increasing low-carbon R&D activity by domestic researchers. 
Emitters in other countries may adopt some of the new low-carbon 
technologies thus reducing emissions elsewhere. Technology 
development and diffusion is reviewed in Chapter 16.
13.6.6.4 Value of Fossil Fuel Resources
Fossil fuel resources are a significant source of exports, employment 
and government revenues for many countries. The value of these 
resources depends on demand for the fuel and competing supplies in 
the relevant international markets. Discoveries and new production 


policies that reduce the use of fossil fuels also reduce the value of 
these resources. A  single policy in one country is unlikely to have 
a noticeable effect on the international price, but similar policies in 
multiple countries could adversely affect the value of the resources. 
For fossil fuel exporting countries, mitigation policies consistent with 
the Paris Agreement goals could result in greater costs from changes 
in fossil fuel prices due to lower international demand than domestic 
policy costs (medium evidence, high agreement) (Liu et al. 2020).
The impact on the value of established resources will be mitigated, to 
some extent, by the reduced incentive to explore for and develop new 
fossil fuel supplies. Nevertheless, efforts to lower global emissions will 
mean substantially less demand for fossil fuels, with the majority of 
current coal reserves and large shares of known gas and oil reserves 
needing to remain unused, with great diversity in impacts between 
different countries (McGlade and Ekins 2015) (Chapters 3, 6, 15). 
Estimates of the potential future loss in value differ greatly. There 
is uncertainty about remaining future fossil fuel use under different 
mitigation scenarios, as well as future fossil fuel prices depending 
on extraction costs, market structures and policies. Estimates of total 
cumulative fossil fuel revenue lost range between 5–67 trillion USD 
(Bauer et al. 2015) with an estimate of the net present value of lost 
profit of around 10 trillion USD (Bauer et al. 2016). Policies that 
constrain supply of fossil fuels in the context of mitigation objectives 
could limit financial losses to fossil fuel producers (Chapter 14). 
13.7 Integrated Policy Packages for 
Mitigation and Multiple Objectives 
Since AR5, the literature on climate policies and policymaking 
has expanded in two significant directions. First, there is growing 
recognition that mitigation policy occurs in the context of multiple 
climate and development objectives (Chapter  4). Different aspects 
of these linkages are discussed across the AR6 WGIII report, 
including concepts and framings (Section 1.6.2), shifting sustainable 
development pathways (Section  4.3 and Cross-Chapter Box  5 in 
Chapter 4), cross-sectoral interactions (Sections 12.6.1 and 12.6.2), 
evidence of co-impacts (Section  17.3), links with adaptation 
(Section 4.4.2) and accelerating the transition (Sections 13.9, 17.1.1, 
17.4.5 and 17.4.6). While the concept of development pathways is 
salient in all countries, it may particularly resonate with policymakers 
in developing countries focused on providing basic needs and 
addressing poverty and inequality, including energy poverty (Ahmad 
2009; Fuso Nerini et al. 2019; Bel and Teixidó 2020; Caetano et al. 
2020; Röser et al. 2020). Consequently, some countries may frame 
policies predominantly in terms of accelerating mitigation, while 
in others a  multiple objectives approach linked to development 
pathways may dominate, depending on their specific socio-economic 
contexts and priorities, governance capacities (McMeekin et al. 2019) 
and perceptions of historical responsibility (Winkler and Rajamani 
2014; Friman and Hjerpe 2015; Winkler et al. 2015; Pan et al. 2017).
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Second, since AR5 there is growing attention to enabling transitions 
over time. Literature on socio-technical transitions, rooted in innovation 
studies, highlights the need for different policy focus at different stages 
of a transition (Geels et al. 2017b,a; Köhler et al. 2019) (Section 1.7.3). 
Other literature examines how broad patterns of development drive 
both social and mitigation outcomes through shifts in policies and 
a  re-alignment of enabling conditions (Chapter  4). Explicit efforts 
to shift development pathways, for example by shifting patterns of 
energy demand and urbanisation, therefore offer broader mitigation 
opportunities (Cross-Chapter Box  5 in Chapter  4). Common to both 
approaches is an emphasis beyond the short term, and attention to 
enabling longer-term structural shifts in economies and societies.
Taking these trends into account, Figure  13.6 outlines the climate 
policy landscape, and how it maps to different parts of this Working 
Group III report. One axis of variation captures alternative framings of 
desired outcomes in national policymaking – mitigation versus multiple 
objectives, while the second captures the shift in policymaking from 
an initial focus on shifting incentives through largely individual policy 
instruments, to explicit consideration of how policies and economy-
wide measures, including those that shift incentives, can combine to 
enable transitions. As a result, Figure 13.6 represents interconnected 
policy ideas, but backed by distinct strands of literature. Notably, each 
of these categories is salient to climate policymaking, although the 
balance may differ depending on country context. 
This section particularly focuses on climate policymaking for 
transition – both socio-technical transitions and shifts in development 
pathways, while direct climate policies and co-benefits are addressed 
in other parts of the report, as indicated in Figure 13.6. This section 
focuses in particular on lessons for designing policy packages for transitions, and is complemented by discussion in Section 13.8 on 
integration between adaptation and mitigation, and Section  13.9 
on economy-wide measures and the broader enabling conditions 
necessary to accelerate mitigation.
13.7.1 Policy Packages for Low-carbon 
Sustainable Transitions
Since AR5 an emergent multidisciplinary literature on policy 
packages, or policy mixes, has emerged that examine how policies 
may be combined for sustainable low-carbon transitions (Rogge 
and Reichardt 2016; Kern et al. 2019). This literature covers various 
sectors including: energy (Rogge et al. 2017); transport (Givoni et al. 
2013); industry (Scordato et al. 2018); agri-food (Kalfagianni and Kuik 
2017); and forestry (Scullion et al. 2016). 
A central theme in the literature is that transitions require policy 
interventions to address system level changes, thereby going beyond 
addressing market failures in two ways. First, structural system 
changes are needed for low-carbon transitions, including building 
low-carbon infrastructure (or example aligning electricity grids and 
storage with the requirements of new low-carbon technology), 
and  adjusting existing institutions to low-carbon solutions (for 
example by reforming electricity market design) (Bak et al. 2017; 
Patt and Lilliestam 2018). Second, explicit transformational system 
changes are necessary, including efforts at directing transformations, 
such as clear direction setting through the elaboration of shared 
visions, and coordination across diverse actors across different policy 
fields, such as climate and industrial policy, and across governance 
levels (Uyarra et al. 2016; Nemet et al. 2017). Framing of outcome
Enhancing mitigationAddressing multiple objectives of mitigation 
and development
Approach to 
policymakingShifting 
incentives ‘Direct mitigation focus’ 
(Section 13.6; 2.8)
Objective: reduce GHG emissions now
Literature: how to design and implement policy instruments, 
with attention to distributional and other concerns
Examples: carbon tax, cap and trade, border carbon adjustment, 
disclosure policies‘Co-benefits’ 
(Sections 17.3; 5.6.2; 12.4.4)
Objective: synergies between mitigation and development 
Literature: scope for and policies to realise synergies and avoid trade-
offs across climate and development objectives
Examples: appliance standards, fuel taxes, community forest 
management, sustainable dietary guidelines, green building codes, 
packages for air pollution, packages for public transport
Enabling 
transition ‘Socio-technical transitions’ 
(Sections 1.7.3; 5.5; 10.8; 6.7; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 16)
Objective: accelerate low-carbon shifts in socio-technical systems
Literature: understand socio-technical transition processes, integrated 
policies for different stages of a technology ‘S-curve’ and explore 
structural, social and political elements of transitions
Examples: packages for renewable energy transition and coal phase-out; 
diffusion of electric vehicles, process and fuel switching in key industries‘System transitions to shift development pathways’ 
(Sections 11.6.6; 7.4.5; 13.9; 17.3.3; Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 4;  
Cross-Chapter Box 9 in Chapter 13) 
Objective: accelerate system transitions and shift development pathways 
to expand mitigation options and meet other development goals 
Literature: examines how structural development patterns and broad 
cross-sector and economy-wide measures drive ability to mitigate while 
achieving development goals through integrated policies and aligning 
enabling conditions 
Examples: packages for sustainable urbanisation, land-energy-water 
nexus approaches, green industrial policy, regional just transition plans
Figure 13.6 | Mapping the landscape of climate policy.  
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13There are some specific suggestions for policy packages: Van den 
Bergh et al. (2021) suggest that innovation support and information 
provision combined with a carbon tax or market, or adoption subsidy 
leads to both effective and efficient outcomes. Others question 
the viability of universally applicable policy packages, and suggest 
packages need to be tailored to local objectives (del Río 2014) 
Consequently, much of the literature focuses on broad principles for 
design of policy packages and mixes, as discussed below.
Comprehensiveness, balance and consistency are important criteria 
for policy packages or mixes (robust evidence, high agreement) 
(Rogge and Reichardt 2016; Scobie 2016; Carter et al. 2018; Santos-
lacueva and González 2018). Comprehensiveness assesses the 
extensiveness of policy packages, including the breadth of system 
and market failures it addresses (Rogge and Reichardt 2016). For 
example, instrument mixes that include only moderate carbon 
pricing, but are complemented by policies supporting new low-carbon technologies and a  moratorium on coal-fired power plants 
may not only be politically more feasible than stringent carbon pricing 
alone, but may also limit efficiency losses and lower distributional 
impacts  (Bertram et al. 2015b). Balance captures whether policy 
instruments are deployed in complementary ways given their different 
purposes, combining for example technology-push approaches such 
as public R&D with demand-pull approaches such as an energy tax. 
A combination of technology-push and demand-pull approaches has 
been shown to support innovation in energy efficient technologies 
in OECD countries (Costantini et al. 2017). Consistency addresses 
the alignment of policy instruments among each other and with the 
policy strategy, which may have multiple and not always consistent 
objectives (Rogge 2019). Consistency of policy mixes has been 
identified as an important driver of low-carbon transformation, 
particularly for renewable energy (Lieu et al. 2018; Rogge and 
Schleich 2018). Box 13.14 summarises the economics literature on 
how policies interact, to inform design of packages. 
Box 13.14 | Policy Interactions of Carbon Pricing and Other Instruments
The economics literature provides insights on policy interactions among the multiple overlapping policies that directly or indirectly 
affect GHG emissions, including when different levels of government are involved. Multiple mitigation policies can be theoretically 
justified if there are multiple objectives or market failures or to achieve distributional objectives and increase policy effectiveness 
(Stiglitz 2019). Examples include the coexistence of the EU ETS with vehicle emission standards and energy efficiency standards (Rey 
et al. 2013), and the fact that 85% of the emissions covered by California’s ETS are also subject to other policies (Bang et al. 2017; 
Mazmanian et al. 2020). Policy interactions are also widespread among energy efficiency policies (Wiese et al. 2018). 
Interactive effects can influence the costs of policy outcomes. With multiple overlapping and possibly non-optimal policies, the effect 
on total cost is not clear. A modelling study of USA mitigation policy finds the costs of using heterogeneous sub-national policies 
to achieve decarbonisation targets is 10% higher than national uniform policies (Peng et al. 2021). When multiple policy goals are 
sought, such as mitigation and R&D, a portfolio of optimal policies achieves the goals at significantly lower cost (Fischer and Newell 
2008). In some cases, overlapping mitigation policies can raise the cost of mitigation (Böhringer et al. 2016) while lowering the cost 
of achieving other goals, such as energy efficiency improvements and expansion of renewable energy (Rosenow et al. 2016; Lecuyer 
and Quirion 2019). It is possible that one or more of the policies is made redundant (Aune and Golombek 2021).
While overlapping policies may raise the cost of mitigation, they increase the likelihood of achieving an emission reduction goal. Policy 
overlap will lead to different optimal carbon prices across jurisdictions (Bataille et al. 2018b). The existence of overlapping policies will 
usually increase administrative and compliance costs. However, ex post analysis shows that transaction costs of mitigation policies are 
low and are not a decisive factor in policy choice (Joas and Flachsland 2016). 
The effectiveness, as well as economic and distributional effects, of a given mitigation policy will depend on the interactions among all 
the policies that affect the targeted emissions. Because a market instrument interacts with every other policy that affects the targeted 
emissions, interactions tend to be more complex for market instruments than for regulations that mandate specific emission reduction 
actions by targeted sources independent of other policies.
An ETS scheme implemented with existing mitigation policies may be subject to the ‘waterbed effect’ – emission reductions undertaken 
by some emitters may be offset by higher emissions by other ETS participants due to overlapping mitigation policies (Schatzki and 
Stavins 2012). This reduces the impact of the ETS and lowers carbon trading prices (Perino 2018). However ex post assessments 
find net emissions reductions. ETS design features such as a price floor and ‘market stability reserve’ can limit the waterbed effect 
(Edenhofer et al. 2017; Kollenberg and Taschini 2019; Narassimhan et al. 2018; FSR Climate 2019). 
A carbon tax, unlike the allowance price, does not change in response to the effect of overlapping policies but those policies may 
reduce emissions by sources subject to the tax and so lower the emission reductions achieved by the tax (Goulder and Stavins 2011). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Policy packages aimed at low-carbon transitions are more effective 
when they include elements to enhance the phase out of carbon-
intensive technologies and practices – often called exnovation – in 
addition to supporting low-carbon niches (Kivimaa and Kern 2016; 
David 2017). Such policies include stringent carbon pricing; changes 
in regime rules such as design of electricity markets; reduced support 
for dominant regime technologies such as removing tax deductions 
for private motor transport based on internal combustion engines; 
and changes in the balance of representation of incumbents versus 
new entrants in deliberation and advisory bodies. For example, CGE 
modelling for China’s fossil fuel subsidy reform found that integrating 
both creation and destabilisation policies is able to reduce rebound 
effects and make the policy mix more effective (Li et al. 2017). 
Sweden’s pulp and paper industry shows that destabilisation policies 
including deregulation of the electricity market and a  carbon tax 
were an important complement to support policies (Scordato et al. 
2018), and other studies show complementary results for Finland’s 
building sector (Kivimaa et al. 2017b) and Norway’s transport and 
energy sector (Ćetković and Skjærseth 2019).
Policy packages for low-carbon transitions are more successful 
if they take into account the potential for political contestation 
and resistance from incumbents who benefit from high-carbon 
systems (medium evidence,  high agreement) (Geels 2014; Roberts 
et al. 2018; Kern and Rogge 2018; Rosenbloom 2018). To do so, 
policies can be sequenced so as to address political obstacles, for 
example, by initially starting with policies to facilitate the entry 
of new firms engaged in low-carbon technologies (Pahle et al. 
2018). Such policies can generate positive feedbacks by creating 
constituencies for continuation of those policies, but need to be 
designed to do so from the outset (Edmondson et al. 2019, 2020). 
For example, supporting renewable energies through feed-in tariffs 
can buttress coalitions for more ambitious climate policy, such as 
through carbon pricing (Meckling et al. 2015). However, negative 
policy feedback may also arise from ineffective policy instruments 
that lose public support, or create concentrated losses that arouse 
oppositional coalitions (Edmondson et al. 2019). Feedback loops 
can operate through changes in resources available to actors; 
changes in expectations; and changes in government capacities 
(Edmondson et al. 2019). 
Another promising strategy is to design short-term policies which 
might help to provide later entry points for more ambitious climate 
policy (Kriegler et al. 2018) and supportive institutions. The sequencing of policies can build coalitions for climate policy, starting with green 
industrial policy (e.g. supporting renewable energies through feed-
in tariffs) and introducing or making carbon pricing more stringent 
when supportive coalitions of stringent climate policy have been 
formed (Meckling et al. 2015). Similarly, investing in supportive 
institutions, with competencies compatible with low-carbon futures, 
are a necessary supportive element of transitions (Pahle et al. 2018; 
Rosenbloom et al. 2019; Domorenok et al. 2021).
13.7.2 Policy Integration for Multiple Objectives 
and Shifting Development Pathways 
This sub-section assesses policy integration and packages required 
to enable shifts in development pathways, with a  particular focus 
on sectoral scale transitions. However, because shifting development 
pathways requires broad transformative change, it complements 
discussion on broader shifts in policymaking such as fiscal, educational, 
and infrastructure policies (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 4) and to 
the alignment of a wide range of enabling conditions required for 
system transitions (Section 13.9). 
In many countries, and particularly when climate policy occurs in the 
context of sustainable development, policymakers seek to address 
climate mitigation in the context of multiple economic and social 
policy objectives (medium evidence, robust agreement) (Halsnæs 
et al. 2014; Campagnolo and Davide 2019; Cohen et al. 2019). Studies 
suggest that co-benefits of climate policies are substantial, especially 
in relation to air quality, and can yield better mitigation and overall 
welfare, yet these are commonly overlooked in policymaking (robust 
evidence, robust agreement) (Nemet et al. 2010; Ürge-Vorsatz et al. 
2014; von Stechow et al. 2015; Mayrhofer and Gupta 2016; Roy 
et al. 2018; Bhardwaj et al. 2019; Karlsson et al. 2020). Other studies 
have shown the existence of strong complementarities between the 
SDGs and realisation of NDC pledges by countries (McCollum et al. 
2018). An explicit attention to development pathways can enhance 
the scope for mitigation, by paying explicit attention to development 
choices that lock-in or lock-out opportunities for mitigation, such as 
around land use and infrastructure choices (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in 
Chapter 4). While the pay-offs are considerable to an approach to 
mitigation that takes into account linkages to multiple objectives 
and the opportunity to shift development pathways, there are 
also associated challenges with implementing this approach 
to policymaking.Box 13.14 (continued)
Policy interactions often occur with the introduction of new mitigation policy instruments. For example, in China several sub-national 
ETSs exist alongside policies to reduce emission intensity, increase energy efficiency and expand renewable energy supplies (Zhang 
2015). These quantity-based ETSs interact with many other policies (Duan et al. 2017), for example price-based provincial carbon 
intensity targets (Qian et al. 2017). They also interact with the level of market regulation; for example, full effectiveness of emissions 
pricing would require electricity market reform in China (Teng et al. 2017). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13First, spanning policy arenas and addressing multiple objectives 
places considerable requirements of coordination on the policymaking 
process (Howlett and del Rio 2015; Obersteiner et al. 2016). Climate 
policy integration suggests several steps should precede actual policy 
formulation, beginning with a clear articulation of the policy frame or 
problem statement (Adelle and Russel 2013; Candel and Biesbroek 
2016). For example, a greenhouse gas limitation framework versus 
a co-benefits framing would likely yield different policy approaches. It 
is then useful to identify the range of actors and institutions involved 
in climate governance – the policy subsystem, the goals articulated, 
the level at which goals are articulated and the links with other 
related policy goals such as energy security or energy access (Candel 
and Biesbroek 2016). The adoption of specific packages of policy 
instruments should ideally follow these prior steps that define the 
scope of the problem, actors and goals. 
In practice, integration has to occur in the context of an already 
existing policy structure, which suggests the need for finding 
windows of opportunity to bring about integration, which can 
be created by international events, alignments with domestic 
institutional procedures, and openings created by policy 
entrepreneurs (Garcia Hernandez and Bolwig 2020). Integration 
also has to occur in the context of existing organisational routines 
and cultures, which can pose a barrier to integration (Uittenbroek 
2016). Experience from the EU suggests that disagreements 
at the level of policy instruments are amenable to resolution 
by deliberation, while normative disagreements at the level of 
objectives require a  hierarchical decision structure (Skovgaard 
2018). As this discussion suggests, the challenge of integration 
operates in two dimensions: horizontal  – between sectoral 
authorities such as ministries or policy domains such as forestry – 
or vertical – either between constitutional levels of power or within 
the internal mandates and interactions of a  sector (Howlett and 
del Rio 2015; Di Gregorio et al. 2017). There are also important 
temporal dimensions to policy goals, as policy and benchmarks 
have to address not just immediate success but also indications of 
future transformation (Dupont and Oberthür 2012; Dupont 2015). 
Second policymaking for shifting development pathways has to 
account for inherent uncertainties in future development paths 
(Moallemi and Malekpour 2018; Castrejon-Campos et al. 2020). 
These uncertainties may be greater in developing countries that 
are growing rapidly and where structural features of the economy 
including infrastructure and urbanisation patterns are fluid. For 
example, reviews of modelling studies of Chinese (Grubb et al. 2015) 
and Indian emissions futures (Spencer and Dubash 2021) find that 
differences in projections can substantially be accounted for by 
alternative assumptions about future economic structural shifts. 
Consequently, an important design consideration is that policy 
packages should be robust, that is, perform satisfactorily for all 
key objectives under a  broad range of plausible futures (Kwakkel 
et al. 2016; Maier et al. 2016; Castrejon-Campos et al. 2020). Such 
an approach to decision-making can be contrasted with one that tries to design an optimal policy package for the ‘best guess’ future 
scenario (Maier et al. 2016). Moreover, policy packages can usefully 
be adapted dynamically to changing circumstances as part of the 
policy process (Haasnoot et al. 2013; Hamarat et al. 2014; Maier 
et al. 2016) including by using exploratory modelling techniques that 
allow comparison of trade-offs across alternative future scenarios 
(Hamarat et al. 2014). Another approach is to link quantitative 
models with a  participatory process that enables decision-makers 
to test the implications of alternative interventions (Moallemi and 
Malekpour 2018). Rosenbloom et al. (2019) suggest that because 
policy mixes should adapt to changing circumstances, instead of 
stability of a particular mix, transitions require embedding policies 
within a  long-term orientation toward a  low-carbon economy, 
including a transition agenda, social legitimacy for this agenda, and 
an appropriate ecosystem of institutions.
Third, achieving changes in development pathways requires engaging 
with place-specific context. It requires attention to existing policies, 
political interests that may gain or lose from a transition, and locally 
specific governance enablers and disablers. As a result, while there 
may be approaches that carry over from one context to another, 
implementation requires careful tailoring of transition approaches to 
specific policy and governance contexts. Cross-Chapter Box 9 in this 
chapter summarises case studies of sectoral transitions from other 
chapters in this report (Chapters 5 to 12) to illustrate this complexity. 
Broader macroeconomic transformative shifts are discussed in more 
detail in Section 13.9.
Common to all the sectoral cases in Cross-Chapter Box  9 is 
a  future-oriented vision of sectoral transition often focused on 
multiple objectives, such as designing tram-based public transport 
systems in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe to simultaneously stimulate 
urban centers, create jobs and enable low-carbon transportation. 
Sectoral transitions are enabled by policy mixes that bring together 
different combinations of instruments  – including regulations, 
financial incentives, convening, education and outreach, voluntary 
agreements, procurement and creation of new institutions  – to 
work together in a  complementary manner. The effectiveness of 
a  policy mix depends on conditions beyond design considerations 
and also rests on the larger governance context within which sector 
transitions occur, which can include enabling and disabling elements. 
Enabling factors illustrated in Cross-Chapter Box  9 include strong 
high level political support, for example to address deforestation in 
Brazil despite powerful logging and farmer interests, or policy design 
to win over existing private interests, for example, by harnessing 
distribution networks of kerosene providers to new LPG technology 
in Indonesia. Disabling conditions include local institutional contexts, 
such as the lack of tree and land tenure in Ghana, which, along 
with the monopoly of the state marketing board, posed obstacles 
to Ghana’s low-carbon cocoa transition. These examples emphasise 
the  importance of attention to local context if policy integration 
and the design of policy mixes are to effectively lead to transitions 
guided by multiple climate and development objectives.
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Cross-Chapter Box 9 | Case Studies of Integrated Policymaking for Sector Transitions
Authors: Parth Bhatia (India), Navroz K. Dubash (India), Igor Bashmakov (the Russian Federation), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Mercedes 
Bustamante (Brazil), Michael Craig (the United States of America), Stephane de la Rue du Can (the United States of America), Manfred 
Fischedick (Germany) Amit Garg (India), Oliver Geden (Germany), Robert Germeshausen (Germany), Siir Kilkis (Turkey), Susanna 
Kugelberg (Denmark), Andreas Loeschel (Germany), Cheikh Mbow (Senegal), Yacob Mulugetta (Ethiopia), Gert-Jan Nabuurs (the 
Netherlands), Vinnet Ndlovu (Zimbabwe/Australia), Peter Newman (Australia), Lars Nilsson (Sweden), Karachepone Ninan (India) 
Real world sectoral transitions reinforce critical lessons on policy integration: a high-level strategic goal (Column a in Cross-Chapter 
Box  9, Table  1), the need for a  clear sector outcome framing (column B), a  carefully coordinated mix of policy instruments and 
governance actions (column C), and the importance of context-specific governance factors (column D). Illustrative examples, drawn 
from sectors, help elucidate the complexity of policymaking in driving sectoral transitions. 
Cross-Chapter Box 9, Table 1 | Case studies of integrated policymaking for sector transitions.
A. Illustrative 
caseB. Objective C. Policy mix D. Governance context
      Enablers Barriers
Shift in mobility 
service provision 
in Kolkata, India 
[Box 5.8] –Improve system 
efficiency, 
sustainability 
and comfort
 –Shift public 
perceptions of  
public transport –Strengthen coordination between modes
 –Formalise and green auto-rickshaws
 –Procure fuel efficient, comfortable,  
low-floor AC buses 
 –Ban cycling on busy roads
 –Deploy policy actors as change-agents, 
mediating between interest groups –Cultural norms around informal 
transport sharing, linked to high 
levels of social trust
 –Historically crucial role of buses 
in transit 
 –App-cab companies shifting norms 
and formalising mobility sharing
 –Digitalisation and safety on board –Complexity: multiple modes with 
separate networks and meanings
 –Accommodating and addressing 
legitimate concerns from 
social movements about the 
exclusionary effects of ‘premium’ 
fares, cycling bans on busy roads
LPG Subsidy 
(‘Zero Kero’) 
Program, 
Indonesia 
[Box 6.3]Decrease fiscal 
expenditures on 
kerosene subsidies 
for cooking –Subsidise provision of Liquefied Petroleum 
Gas (LPG) cylinders and initial equipment
 –Convert existing kerosene suppliers 
to LPG suppliers –Provincial government and industry 
support in targeting beneficiaries 
and implementation
 –Synergies in kerosene and LPG 
distribution infrastructures –Continued user preference for 
traditional solid fuels
 –Reduced GHG benefits as subsidy 
shifted between fossil fuels
Action Plan 
for Prevention 
and Control of 
Deforestation 
in the Legal 
Amazon, Brazil 
[Box 7.9]Control deforestation 
and promote 
sustainable 
development –Expand protected areas; homologation of 
indigenous lands
 –Improve inspections, satellite-based 
monitoring 
 –Restrict public credit for enterprises 
and municipalities with high 
deforestation rates
 –Set up a REDD+ mechanism 
(Amazon Fund) –Participatory agenda-setting process
 –Cross-sectoral consultations on 
conservation guidelines
 –Mainstreaming of deforestation 
in government programmes 
and projects –Political polarisation leading 
to erosion of environmental 
governance
 –Reduced representation and 
independence of civil society 
in decision-making bodies
 –Lack of clarity around 
land ownership
Climate Smart 
Cocoa (CSC) 
production, 
Ghana [Box 7.12] –Promote sustainable 
intensification of 
cocoa production
 –Reduce deforestation
 –Enhance 
incomes and 
adaptive capacities –Distribute shade tree seedlings 
 –Provide access to agronomic information 
and agrochemical inputs
 –Design a multi-stakeholder programme 
including MNCs, farmers and NGOs –Local resource governance 
mechanisms ensuring voice 
for smallholders
 –Community governance allowed 
adapting to local context
 –Private sector role in  
popularising CSC –Lack of secure tenure (tree rights)
 –Bureaucratic and legal hurdles to 
register trees
 –State monopoly on cocoa 
marketing, export
Coordination 
mechanism 
for joining 
fragmented 
urban 
policymaking 
in Shanghai, 
China [Box 8.3]Integrate policymaking 
across objectives, 
towards low-carbon 
urban development –Combine central targets and evaluation 
with local flexibility for initiating varied 
policy experiments
 –Establish a local leadership team for 
coordinating cross-sectoral policies 
involving multiple institutions
 –Create a direct programme fund for 
implementation and capacity-building –Strong vertical linkages between 
Central and local levels
 –Mandate for policy learning 
to inform national policy 
 –Experience with mainstreaming 
mitigation in related areas  
(e.g. air pollution) –Challenging starting point –  
low share of RE, high dependency 
on fossil fuels
 –Continued need for 
high investments 
in a developing context
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Cross-Chapter Box 9 (continued)
13.8 Integrating Adaptation, Mitigation 
and Sustainable Development 
There is growing consensus that integration of adaptation and 
mitigation will advance progress towards sustainable development, 
and that ambitious mitigation efforts will reduce the need for 
adaptation in the long term (robust evidence, high agreement) (IPCC 
2014a). There is no level of mitigation, however, that will completely 
erase the need for adaptation to climate change (robust evidence, 
high agreement) (Mauritsen and Pincus 2017). It is therefore urgent 
to design and implement a  multi-objective policy framework for 
mitigation, adaptation, and sustainable development that considers 
issues of equity and long-term developmental pathways across 
regions (robust evidence, high agreement) (Jordan et al. 2018; 
Mills-Novoa and Liverman 2019; Wang and Chen 2019). This section 
explores the logic behind the integration of adaptation and mitigation 
in practice (Section  13.8.1), the approaches to this integration 
including climate-resilient pathways, ecosystem-based solutions, 
and a nexus approach (Section 13.8.2); examples of the adaption and mitigation relationships and linkages (Section 13.8.3); and enabling 
and disabling factors for governance of mitigation and adaption.
13.8.1 Synergies Between Adaptation and Mitigation
Integrated climate-development actions require a  context-specific 
understanding of synergies and trade-offs with other policy 
priorities (Figure  13.6) with the aim of implementing mitigation/
adaptation policies that reduce GHG emissions while simultaneously 
strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability (robust evidence, 
high agreement) (Klein et al. 2005; IPCC 2007; Zhao et al. 2018; Mills-
Novoa and Liverman 2019; Solecki et al. 2019). Efficient, equitable 
and inclusive policies which also acknowledge and contribute 
directly to other pressing priorities such reducing poverty, improving 
health, providing access to clean water, and fostering sustainable 
consumption and production practices are helpful for mitigation/
adaptation goals (robust evidence, high agreement) (Landauer et al. 
2019; Grafakos et al. 2020). A. Illustrative 
caseB. Objective C. Policy mix D. Governance context
      Enablers Barriers
Policy package 
for building 
energy efficiency, 
EU [Box 9.SM.1]Reduce energy 
consumption, 
integrating RE 
and mitigating 
GHG emissions 
from buildings –Energy performance standards, set at 
nearly zero energy for new buildings
 –Energy performance standards 
for appliances
 –Energy performance certificates shown 
during sale
 –Long-term renovation strategies –Binding EU-level targets, 
directives and sectoral effort 
sharing regulations
 –Supportive urban policies, 
coordinated through 
city partnerships
 –Funds raised from allowances 
auctioned under ETS –Inadequate local technical 
capacity to implement 
multiple instruments
 –Complex governance structure 
leading to uneven stringency
African 
electromobility – 
trackless trams 
with solar in 
Bulawayo and 
e-motorbikes 
in Kampala 
[Box 10.4] –Leapfrog into 
a decarbonised 
transport future
 –Achieve 
multiple social 
benefits beyond 
mobility provision –Develop urban centres with solar at 
station precincts 
 –Public-private partnerships for financing
 –Sanction demonstration projects for new 
electric transit and new electric motorbikes 
(for freight) –‘Achieving SDGs’ was an enabling 
policy framing
 –Multi-objective policy process 
for mobility, mitigation and 
manufacturing
 –Potential for funding through 
climate finance
 –Co-benefits such as local 
employment generation –Economic decline in the first 
decade of the 21st century
 –Limited fiscal capacity for public 
funding of infrastructure
 –Inadequate charging 
infrastructure for e-motorbikes
Initiative for 
a climate-friendly 
industry in North 
Rhine Westphalia 
(NRW), Germany 
[Box 11.3]Collaboratively 
develop innovative 
strategies towards 
a net zero industrial 
sector, while securing 
competitiveness –Build platform to bring together industry, 
scientists and government in self-
organised innovation teams
 –Intensive cross-branch cooperation to 
articulate policy/infrastructure needs –NRW is Germany’s industrial 
heartland, with an export-oriented 
industrial base
 –Established government– 
industry ties
 –Active discourse between industry 
and publicCompliance rules preventing  
in-depth cooperation
Food2030 
Strategy, Finland 
[Box 12.2] –Local, organic and 
climate friendly 
food production
 –Responsible and 
healthy food 
consumption
 –A competitive food 
supply chain –Target funding and knowledge support 
for innovations
 –Apply administrative means (legislation, 
guidance) to increase organic food 
production and procurement
 –Use education and information 
instruments to shift behaviour 
(media campaigns, websites) –Year-long deliberative stakeholder 
engagement process across sectors 
 –Institutional structures for 
agenda-setting, guiding 
policy implementation and 
reflexive discussions –Weak role of integrated 
impact assessments to inform 
agenda-setting
 –Monitoring and evaluation close 
to ministry in charge
 –Lack of standardised indicators  
of food system sustainability
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Adaptation and mitigation are deeply linked in practice  – at the 
local level, for instance, asset managers address integrated low-
carbon resilience to climate change impacts and urban planners 
do the same (Ürge-Vorsatz et al. 2018; Grafakos et al. 2020) 
(Table 13.3). Similarly, ecosystem-based (or nature-based) solutions, 
may generate co-benefits by simultaneously sinking carbon, cooling 
urban areas through shading, purifying water, improving biodiversity, 
and offering recreational opportunities that improve public health 
(Raymond et al. 2017). Accurately identifying and qualitatively or 
quantitatively assessing these co-benefits (Stadelmann et al. 2014; 
Leiter and Pringle 2018; Leiter et al. 2019) is central to an integrated 
adaptation and mitigation policy evaluation. 
Some studies press the need to consider the complex ways that power 
and interests influence how collective decisions are made, and who 
benefits from and pays for these decisions, of climate policy and to be 
aware of unintended consequences, especially for vulnerable people 
living under poor conditions (Mayrhofer and Gupta 2016; De Oliveira 
Silva et al. 2018). The specific adaptation and mitigation linkages will 
differ by country and region, as illustrated by Box 13.15.
13.8.2 Frameworks That Enable the Integration 
of Adaption and Mitigation
The IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) emphasised the 
importance of climate-resilient pathways – development trajectories 
that combine adaptation and mitigation through specific actions 
to achieve the sustainable development goals (Prasad et al. 2009; 
Lewison et al. 2015; Fankhauser and McDermott 2016; Romero-
Lankao et al. 2016; Solecki et al. 2019) – from the household to the state level, since risks and opportunities vary by location and the 
specific local development context (robust evidence, high agreement) 
(IPCC 2014b; Denton et al. 2015). 
Synergies between adaptation and mitigation are included in 
many of the NDCs submitted to the UNFCCC, as part of overall 
low-emissions climate-resilient development strategies (UNFCCC 
Secretariat 2016). a majority of developing countries have agreed to 
develop National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) in which many initiatives 
contribute simultaneously to the SDGs (Schipper et al. 2020) as well 
to mitigation efforts (Hönle et al. 2019; Atteridge et al. 2020). For 
example, developing countries recognise that adaptation actions 
in sectors such as agriculture, forestry and land-use management 
can reduce GHGs. Nevertheless, other more complex trade-offs 
also exist between bioenergy production or reforestation and 
the land needed for agricultural adaptation and food security 
(African Development Bank 2019; Hönle et al. 2019; Nyiwul 2019) 
(Chapter 7). For some of the Small Islands Development States (SIDS), 
forestry and coastal management, including mangrove planting, 
saltmarsh and seagrass are sectors that intertwine both mitigation 
and adaptation (Duarte et al. 2013; Atteridge et al. 2020). Integrated 
efforts also occur at the city level, such as the Climate Change Action 
Plan of Wellington City, which includes enhancing forest sinks to 
increase carbon sequestration while at the same time protecting 
biodiversity and reducing groundwater runoff as rainfall increases 
(Grafakos et al. 2019).
To fully maximise their potential co-benefits and trade-offs of 
integrating adaptation and mitigation, these should be explicitly 
sought, rather than accidentally discovered (Spencer et al. 2017; 
Berry et al. 2015), and policies designed to account for both (robust Box 13.15 | Adaptation and Mitigation Synergies in Africa
Synergies between mitigation and adaptation actions and sustainable development that can enhance the quality and pace of 
development in Africa exist at both sectoral and national levels. Available data on NDCs show the top mitigation priorities in African 
countries include energy, forestry, transport and agriculture and waste, and adaptation priorities focus on agriculture, water, energy 
and forestry. The energy sector dominates in mitigation actions and the agricultural sector is the main focus of adaptation measures, 
with the latter sector being a slightly larger source of greenhouse gases than the former (Mbeva et al. 2015; African Development 
Bank 2019; Nyiwul 2019).
Renewable energy development can support synergies between mitigation and adaptation by stimulating local and national 
economies through microenterprise development; providing off-grid affordable and accessible solutions; and contributing to poverty 
reduction through increased locally available resource use and employment and increased technical skills (Nyiwul 2019; Dal Maso 
et al. 2020). The Paris Agreement’s technology transfer and funding mechanisms could reduce renewable energy costs and providing 
scale economics to local economies. 
Barriers to achieving these synergies include the absence of suitable macro-and micro- level policy environments for adaptation 
and mitigation actions; coherent climate change policy frameworks and governance structures to support adaptation; institutional 
and capacity deficiencies in climate and policy research such as on data integration and technical analysis; and the high financial 
needs associated with the cost of mitigation and adaptation (African Development Bank 2019; Nyiwul 2019). Strengthening of 
national institutions and policies can support maximising synergies and co-benefits between adaptation and mitigation to reduce silos 
and redundant overlaps, increase knowledge exchange at the country and regional levels, and support engagement with bilateral and 
multilateral partners and mobilising finance through the mechanisms available (African Development Bank 2019).
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13evidence, high agreement) (Caetano et al. 2020). For example, the 
REDD+ initiative focus on mitigation by carbon sequestration was 
set up to provide co-benefits such as: nature protection, political 
inclusion, monetary income, economic opportunities. However, 
some unintended trade-offs may have occurred such as physical 
displacement, loss of livelihoods, increased human–wildlife conflicts, 
property claims, food security concerns, and an unequal distribution 
of benefits to local population groups (Bushley 2014; Duguma 
et al. 2014a; Gebara et al. 2014; Kongsager and Corbera 2015; 
Anderson et al. 2016; Di Gregorio et al. 2016, 2017). Ultimately, 
ecosystem (or nature-based) strategies, such as the use of wetlands to create accessible recreational areas that improve public health 
while improving biodiversity, sinking carbon and protecting 
neighbourhoods from extreme flooding events, may lead to more 
efficient and cost-effective policies (Klein et al. 2005; Locatelli et al. 
2011; Kongsager et al. 2016; Mills-Novoa and Liverman 2019). 
The ‘nexus’ approach is another widely used framework that describes 
the linkages between water, energy, food, health and other socio-
economic factors in some integrated assessment approaches (Rasul 
and Sharma 2016). The Food-Energy-Water (FEW)nexus, for example, 
considers how water is required for energy production and supply Box 13.16 | Latin America Region Adaptation Linking Mitigation: REDD+ Lessons
Thirty-three countries in the Latin American region have submitted their NDCs, and 70% of their initiatives have included mitigation 
and adaptation options focusing on sustainable development (Bárcena et al. 2018; Kissinger et al. 2019). However, most of these 
policies are disconnected across sectors (Loaiza et al. 2017; Locatelli et al. 2017). National governments have identified their relevant 
sectors as: energy, agriculture, forestry, land-use change, biodiversity, and water resources (see Figure 1 below). The region houses 
57% of the primary forest of the planet. REDD+ aims to reduce GHG while provide ecosystems services to vulnerable communities 
(Bárcena et al. 2018). Lessons from successful REDD+ programmes include the benefits of a multilevel structure from international to 
national down to strong community organisation, as well as secure resources funding, with most of the projects relying on external 
sources of funding (medium evidence, high agreement) (Loaiza et al. 2017; Kissinger et al. 2019). However, there is limited evidence 
of effective adaptation co-benefits, which may be related to the lack of provision of forest standards; a disproportionate focus on 
mitigation and lack of attention to the well-being of the population in rural and agricultural areas (Kongsager and Corbera 2015).
Conflicts have emerged over political views, government priorities of resources (oil, bioenergy, hydropower), and weak governance 
among national and local authorities, indigenous groups and other stakeholders such as NGOs which play a  critical role in the 
technological and financial support for the REDD+ initiative (Reed 2011; Kashwan 2015; Gebara et al. 2014; Locatelli et al. 2011, 
2017). a more holistic approach which recognises these social, environmental and political drivers would appear to have benefits but 
assessment is needed to allow evidence-based actionable policy statements. 
Mitigation Adaptation02468101214161820
Energy Agriculture
and cattleOther Industry Water
resourcesWaste Tourism Transport Biodiversity Land use
changeForest Coastal
ZoneHealth
Box 13.16, Figure 1 | Latin America and Caribbean: high priority sectors for mitigation and adaptation.  Number of countries that name the following 
sector in their national climate change plans and/or communications. The purple and green bars represent adaptation and mitigation respectively. Source: reproduced 
with permission from Bárcena et al. (2018).
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
(and thus tied to mitigation), how energy is needed to treat and 
transport water, and how both are critical to adaptable and resilient 
food production systems (Mohtar and Daher 2014; Biggs et al. 2015). 
Climate change impacts all these dimensions in the form of multi-
hazard risk (Froese and Schilling 2019). Although integrative, the FEW 
nexus faces many challenges including: limited knowledge integration; 
coordination between different institutions and levels of government; 
politics and power; cultural values; and ways of managing climate 
risk (Leck and Roberts 2015; Romero-Lankao et al. 2017; Mercure 
et al. 2019). More empirical assessment is needed to identify potential 
overlaps between sectoral portfolios, as this could help to delineate 
resources allocation for synergies and to avoid trade-offs. 13.8.3 Relationships Between Mitigation and 
Adaptation Measures 
There are multiple ways that mitigation and adaptation may be 
integrated. Table 13.3 sets out those relationships broken down into 
four areas: adaptation that contributes to mitigation; mitigation that 
contributes to adaptation; holistic, sustainability first strategies; and 
trade-offs. The table shows that more holistic and sustainability-
oriented policies can open up the possibility for accelerated transitions 
across multiple priority domains (robust evidence, high agreement). 
Table 13.3 | Relationships between adaptation and mitigation measures.  
Policy/action Interrelation explained Reference
Adaptation that contributes to mitigation
Coastal adaptation and blue carbon; 
developing strategies for conservation 
and restoration of blue carbon 
ecosystems generating resilient 
communities and landscapes. 
 –Contributes to carbon storage 
and sequestration.Conservation of habitats and ecosystems, protect communities from extreme events, increase 
food security, and provide ecosystem services. At the same time, restoration of mangroves, 
tidal marshes, and seagrasses have high rates of carbon sequestration, act as long-term carbon 
sinks, and are contained within clear national jurisdictions. Example: conservation programmes 
on Brazilian mangroves, Spanish seagrass meadows, the Great Barriers Reef in Australia, 
and Coastal Management Strategy in New Zealand. Andresen et al. (2012); 
Herr and Landis (2016); Duarte 
(2017); Doll and Oliveira 
(2017); Howard et al. (2017); 
Gattuso et al. (2018); Cooley et al. 
(2019); Karani and Failler (2020); 
Lovelock and Reef (2020)
Nature-Based Solutions (Nbs); Nature-
based solutions are interventions that 
use the natural functions of healthy 
ecosystems to protect the environment 
but also provide numerous economic 
and social benefits.
 –Contributes to carbon 
storage and sequestration using 
individual and clustered trees.NbS complement and shares common elements with a wide variety of other approaches to 
building the resilience of social-ecological systems. Policies at national and sub-national level 
include community-based adaptation, ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction, climate-smart 
agriculture, and green infrastructure, and often place emphasis on using participatory and 
inclusive processes and community/stakeholder engagement. Examples: Mexico and the 
United Kingdom provide support for NbS in their national biodiversity strategies and action 
plans some related to water management. UK launched the Green Recovery Challenge Fund 
to create jobs with a focus on tree planting and the rehabilitation of peatlands.Doswald and Osti (2011); 
Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological 
Diversity (2019); Ihobe – 
Environmental Management 
Agency (2017); Zwierzchowska 
et al. (2019); Seddon et al. (2020); 
Choi et al. (2021); OECD (2021b)
Ecosystem-based Adaptation (Eba); 
use biodiversity and ecosystem 
services to help people to adapt to 
the adverse effects of climate change, 
aiming to maintain and increase the 
resilience and reduce the vulnerability 
of ecosystems and people. 
 –Contributes to carbon storage 
and sequestration.EbA involves the conservation, sustainable management and restoration of ecosystems, 
such as forests, grasslands, wetlands, mangroves or coral reefs to reduce the harmful 
impacts of climate hazards including shifting patterns or levels of rainfall, changes in 
maximum and minimum temperatures, stronger storms, and increasingly variable climatic 
conditions. Examples: some NDCs include EbA and NbS harmonising national policies 
(for example: National Adaptation Plan) with other national climate and development policy 
processes, such as: water resources management plan, disaster risk reduction strategies, 
land planning codes. IPBES (2019); Doswald 
et al. (2014); Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (2009); McAllister (2007); 
Colls et al. (2009); Rubio (2017); 
Raymond et al. (2017); Duarte 
(2017); Gattuso et al. (2018)
Urban Greening; urban forestry, planting 
in road reserves and tree planting along 
main streets.
 –Contributes to carbon storage 
and sequestration.
 –Energy use reduction.Urban afforestation and reforestation produce cooling effect and water retention while helping 
to reducing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Green walls and rooftops increase energy 
efficiency of buildings and decrease water runoff and provide insulation for the buildings. 
Examples: Wellington City Council and other entities must comply with the New Zealand 
Emission Trading System regulatory framework that provides guidance and requirements 
of climate change planning and implementation for both mitigation and adaptation (M&A).Santamouris (2014); Sharifi 
and Yamagata (2016); Grafakos 
et al. (2018); Pasimeni et al. (2019); 
Anderson et al. (2016)
Climate adaptation plans at city level; 
sub-national policies that would lead 
to carbon reduction to support climate 
mitigation. Contribution to mitigation:
 –Carbon storage and sequestration.
 –Energy use reduction.
 –Renewable energy.Cities with Climate Actions Plans include urban spatial planning and capacity-building initiatives. 
Some cities with adaptation and mitigation combined climate change action plans are: Bangkok, 
Chicago, Montevideo, Wellington, Durban, Paris, Mexico City, and Melaka. And cities with 
A&M actions are: Los Angeles, Vancouver, Barcelona, London, Accra, Santiago de Chile, Bogota, 
Curitiba, and other. 
Co-benefits generated by climate actions at cities: heat stress reduction; water scarcity, 
stormwater and flood management; air quality improvement, human health and well-being, 
aesthetic/amenity, recreation/tourism, environmental justice, real estate value, food production, 
green jobs opportunities.Garcetti (2019); Horne (2020); 
Barcelona City Council (2018); 
Greater London Authority (2018); 
Accra Metropolitan Assembly 
(2020); Choi et al. (2021); Grafakos 
et al. (2019); Nakano et al. (2017); 
Peng and Bai (2018); Zen et al. 
(2019); Bai et al. (2018)
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13Policy/action Interrelation explained Reference
Mitigation that contributes to adaptation
Green Infrastructure; policies to support 
the design and implementation of 
a hybrid network of natural, semi-natural, 
and engineered features within, around, 
and beyond urban areas at all scales, 
to provide multiple ecosystem services 
and benefits.
 –Carbon storage and sequestration.
 –Reduced energy consumption. Adaptation benefits: flood management, heat stress reduction individually, or jointly, coastal 
protection, water scarcity management, groundwater resources, ecosystem resilience 
improvement, air quality, water supply, flood control, water quality improvement, groundwater 
recharge. Social co-benefits: aesthetic, recreation, environmental education, improved human 
health/well-being, social cohesion, and poverty reduction. Policy examples: national building 
code guidelines, flood safety standards, local land-use plans, local building codes, integrated 
water management for flood control. Atchison (2019); Conger and Chang 
(2019); Schoonees et al. (2019); 
De la Sota et al. (2019); Choi et al. 
(2021); Zwierzchowska et al. (2019)
REDD+ Strategies; an incentive for 
developing countries to increase 
carbon sinks, to protect their forest 
resources and coastal wetlands. Mostly 
are national strategies led by the state 
with contribution of international donors. 
 –Contributes to carbon storage 
and sequestration.
 –Renewable energy.REDD+ strategies aim to generate social benefits such as poverty reduction, and ecological 
services such as water supply, water quality enhancement, conserves soil and water by 
reducing erosion. For example, indigenous communities of Socio Bosque in Ecuador have 
sustained livelihoods and maintaining ties to land, place, space, and cosmovision. While in 
Cameroon, upfront contextual inequities with respect to technical capabilities, power, gender, 
level of education, and wealth have been barriers to individuals’ likelihood of participating 
in and benefiting from the projects.McBurney (2021); Tegegne et al. 
(2021); Anderson et al. (2016); 
Busch et al. (2011); Bushley (2014); 
Dickson and Kapos (2012); Froese 
and Schilling (2019); Gebara 
et al. (2014); Pham et al. (2014); 
Jodoin (2017)
Household energy-efficiency 
and renewable energy measures; 
energy policies may improve socio-
economic development.
 –Energy use reduction.Energy Efficiency (EE) emerges as a feasible and sustainable solution in Latin America, to 
minimise energy consumption, increase competitiveness levels and reduce carbon footprint. 
Achieving high levels of EE in the building sector requires  new policies and strengthening their 
legal framework. Microenterprise development contributes to poverty reductions as renewable 
energy stimulate local and national economies. Chan et al. (2017); Silvero 
et al. (2019); Zabaloy et al. (2019); 
Alves et al. (2020); Nyiwul (2019); 
Dal Maso et al. (2020)
Sustainability first: holistic approaches
Integrated community 
sustainability plans.Climate change mitigation and adaptation are embedded in a plan to improve affordability, 
biodiversity, public health, and other aspects of communities.Burch et al. (2014); Shaw 
et al. (2014); Stuart et al. (2016); 
Dale et al. (2020)
Inclusive future visioning using social-
ecological systems or socio-technical 
systems thinking.Participatory processes that highlight the cultural and social dimensions of climate change 
responses and synergies/trade-offs between priorities rather than an exclusive focus on technical 
aspects of solutions.Gillard et al. (2016); 
Krzywoszynska et al. (2016)
Climate Resilience Cities; integrating 
New Urban Agenda (NUA), SDGs, 
climate actions for A&M, and Disaster 
Risk Reduction (DRR) for local and 
sub-national governments, and DRR 
within a multi-hazard approach based 
on Sendai Framework. Resilient cities are including SDGs, targets, A&M options and DRR to build a resilient plan for 
urban planning, health, life quality and jobs creation.
Climate mitigation and sustainable energy actions adopted at the local level are interconnected. 
For instance, cities with Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan, which required the 
establishment of a baseline emission inventory and the adoption of policy measures, are already 
showing a tangible achievement regarding sustainable goals.Barcelona City Council (2018); 
Garcetti (2019); Accra Metropolitan 
Assembly (2020); Blok 2016; 
Giampieri et al. (2019); Gomez 
Echeverri (2018); Long and Rice 
(2019); Pasimeni et al. (2019); 
Romero-Lankao et al. (2016)
Trade-offs
Land-use strategies; for mitigation 
or adaptation considered in isolation, 
may cause a conflict in land planning. 
 –Carbon storage and sequestration.
 –Energy use reduction.
 –Renewable energy.Increasing density of land use, land-use mix and transit connectivity could increase climate stress 
and reduce green open spaces. It may increase the urban heat island impacting human health, 
and expose population to coastal inundation. Some of the policies and strategies to minimise 
this are: land-use planning, zoning, land-use permits, mobilising private finance in the protection 
of watersheds, integrated coastal zone management, flood safety standards, and other. More 
assessment is needed prior to new land use to reduce or prevent actions which negatively alter 
ecosystem services and environmental justice. O’Donnell (2019); Bush and Doyon 
(2019); Grafakos et al. (2019); 
Landauer et al. (2015); Viguié 
and Hallegatte (2012); Floater 
et al. (2016); Xu et al. (2019); 
Landauer et al. (2019)
Low-carbon, net zero and climate change 
resilient building codes that fail to 
account for affordability.
 –Energy reduction.
 –Renewable energy. Low-carbon or net zero emissions have multi-objective strategies, integrated policies, 
regulations, and actions at the national and sub-national levels. Trade-offs may be related to 
policy mechanisms that must be implemented comprehensively, not individually. However, 
different administrative levels and institutions may create a barrier to inter-sectoral coordination. 
For example: ‘Greening’ programmes may produce positive mitigation and adaptation outcomes 
but may also accelerate displacement and gentrification at city level. Chaker et al. (2021); del Río and 
Cerdá (2017); Choi et al. (2021); 
Papadis and Tsatsaronis (2020); 
Wolch et al. (2014); Garcia-Lamarca 
et al. (2021); Haase et al. (2017); 
Sharifi (2020); Viguié and Hallegatte 
(2012); del Río (2014) 
13.8.3.1 Governing the Linkages Between Mitigation and 
Adaptation at the Local, Regional, and Global Scales 
International policy frameworks, such as the 2015 Paris Agreement, 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Disk Reduction, and the New Urban 
Agenda for sustainable urban systems, provide an integrated approach 
for both adaptation and mitigation, while promoting sustainable development and climate resilience across scales (from global, regional, 
to local government actions (robust evidence,  high agreement) (Duguma 
et al. 2014b; Heidrich et al. 2016; Di Gregorio et al. 2017; Locatelli et al. 
2017; Nachmany and Setzer 2018; Mills-Novoa and Liverman 2019). 
Even so, the specific ways that these linkages are governed vary widely 
depending on institutional and jurisdictional scale, competing policy 
priorities, and available capacity (Landauer et al. 2019). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Supranational levels of action such as the EU climate change policy 
have influenced the development and implementation of Climate 
Change Action Plans (CCAPs) at the sub-national level (Heidrich 
et al. 2016; Villarroel Walker et al. 2017; Reckien et al. 2018). While 
adaptation is gaining prominence and is increasingly included in the 
NDCs of EU nations, the implementation of adaptation and mitigation 
by EU states are at different stages (Fleig et al. 2017). Fleig et al. 
(2017) found that all EU states, with the exception of Hungary, have 
adopted a framework of laws tackling mitigation and adaptation to 
climate change. However, an assessment of climate legislation in 
Europe pointed out that there has been little coordination between 
mitigation and adaptation, and that implementation varies according 
to different national conditions (Nachmany et al. 2015). More recently, 
however, integrated adaptation/mitigation plans have been prepared 
in Europe under the Covenant of Mayors, in which synergies and 
trade-offs can be better revealed and assessed (Bertoldi et al. 2020).
Local governments and cities are increasingly emerging as important 
climate change actors (Gordon and Acuto 2015) (Section  13.5). 
While cities and local governments are developing Climate Change 
Action Plans (CCAPs), plans that explicitly integrate the design and 
implementation of adaptation and mitigation are a minor percentage, 
with few cities establishing inter-relationships between them (Nordic 
Council of Ministers 2017; Grafakos et al. 2018). Compared to national 
climate governance, local governments are more likely to develop and 
advance climate policies, generating socio-economic or environmental 
co-benefits, and improve communities’ quality of life (Gill et al. 2007; 
Bowen et al. 2014; Duguma et al. 2014b; Mayrhofer and Gupta 2016; 
Deng et al. 2017; Hennessey et al. 2017). There may be a disconnect, 
however, between the responsibility that a particular jurisdiction has 
over mitigation and adaptation (city officials, for instance) and the 
scale of resources or capacities that they have available to bring to 
bear on the problem (regional to national provision of energy and 
transport) (Di Gregorio et al. 2019; Dale et al. 2020). 
13.8.4 Integrated Governance Including Equity 
and Sustainable Development
Climate policy integration carries implications for the pursuit of the 
SDGs, given that it is nearly impossible to achieve the desired socio-
economic gains if fundamental environmental issues, such as climate 
change, are not addressed (Gomez-Echeverri 2018). Research on 
climate resilient development pathways (Roy et al. 2018), for instance, 
argues for long-term policy planning that combines the governance 
of national climate and SD goals, builds institutional capacity across 
all sectors, jurisdictions, and actors, and enhances participation and 
transparency (robust evidence, high agreement) (Chapter 4 and 17).
In the Global South, climate change policies are often established in 
the context of sustainable development and of other pressing local 
priorities (e.g.,  air pollution, health, and food security). National 
climate policy in these countries tends to give prominence to 
adaptation based on country vulnerability, climatic risk, gender-based differences in exposur to that risk, and the importance of local/
traditional and indigenous knowledge (Beg et al. 2002; Duguma 
et al. 2014b). Despite the evidence that integrated mitigation and 
adaptation policies can be effective and efficient (Klein et al. 2005) 
and can potentially reduce trade-offs, there is still limited evidence 
of how such integrated policies would specifically contribute to 
progress on the SDGs (robust evidence, high agreement) (Kongsager 
et al.2016; Di Gregorio et al. 2017; Antwi-Agyei et al. 2018; De Coninck 
et al. 2018; Campagnolo and Davide 2019).
Where mainstreaming of environmental concerns has been 
attempted through national plans, they have had success in some 
cases when backed by strong political commitments that support 
a vertical coordination structure rather than horizontal structures led 
by the focus ministry (Nunan et al. 2012). Such political commitments 
are therefore crucial to success but insufficient in and of themselves 
(Runhaar et al. 2018; Wamsler et al. 2020). Integration of the budget 
process is particularly important, as are aligned time frames across 
different objectives (Saito 2013). Recognition of the functional 
interactions across policy sectors is improved by a  translation of 
long-term policy objectives into a plan that aligns with integration 
goals (Corry 2012; Oels 2012; Dupont 2019).
There are important links between inequality, justice and climate 
change (Ikeme 2003; Bailey 2017). Many of these operate through 
the benefits, costs and risks of climate action (distributive justice), 
while others focus on differential participation and recognition of 
sub-national actors and marginalised groups (procedural justice) 
(Bulkeley and Castán Broto 2013; Bulkeley et al. 2013; Hughes 2013; 
Reckien et al. 2018; Romero-Lankao and Gnatz 2019). 
Justice principles are rarely incorporated in climate change framing 
and action (Sovacool and Dworkin 2015; Genus and Theobald 2016; 
Heikkinen et al. 2019; Romero-Lankao and Gnatz 2019). Yet, equity 
is salient to mitigation debates, because climate change mitigation 
policies can have also negative impacts (Brugnach et al. 2017; 
Ramos-Castillo et al. 2017; Klinsky 2018), exacerbated by poverty, 
inequality and corruption (Reckien et al. 2018; Markkanen and 
Anger-Kraavi 2019). The siting of facilities and infrastructure that 
advance decarbonisation (such as public transit infrastructure, 
renewable energy facilities and so on) may have implications for 
environmental justice. Integrated attention to justice in climate, 
environment and energy, as well as involvement of host communities 
in siting assessments and decision-making processes, can help to 
avoid such conflict (McCord et al. 2020; Hughes and Hoffmann 2020). 
As a  result, successful policy integration goes beyond optimising 
public management routines, and must resolve key trade-offs 
between actors and objectives (Meadowcroft 2009; Nordbeck and 
Steurer 2016). 
The potential for transformative climate change policy that delivers 
both adaptation and mitigation is also shaped by a  number of 
enabling and disabling factors tied to governance processes (robust 
evidence, high agreement) (Burch et al. 2014) (Section 13.9). 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions1313.9 Accelerating Mitigation Through  
Cross-sectoral and Economy-wide  
System Change
13.9.1 Introduction
Section  13.9 assesses literature related to economy wide and 
cross  – sector systemic change as an approach to accelerate 
climate mitigation. 
It focuses specifically on policy and institutions, as two of the six 
enabling conditions for economy-wide system change and thus 
provides a third dimension of the role of policy and institutions to 
climate mitigation. Enabling conditions in general are discussed in 
Chapter 4 of the SR1.5 (IPCC 2018), as well as Chapter 4 of this report. This section follows on from Section 13.6 (single policy instruments) 
and 13.7 (policy packages). Section  13.9 literature follows closely 
on from Section 13.7 literature on policy packages, which discusses 
change within one system, although there remains an overlap.
Section 13.9.2 provides a brief introduction to policy and institutions 
as two of the six dimensions of enabling conditions, and the 
importance of enabling conditions to systemic change and climate 
mitigation. Section 13.9.3 briefly introduces actions for transformative 
justice, which seek to restructure the underlying system framework 
that produces mitigation inequalities. Section  13.9.4 provides 
a  brief overview of net zero policies and targets (often no more 
than aspirational), which imply economy-wide measures and 
system change. Section  13.9.5 assesses the literature arguing for 
a  system restructuring approach to climate mitigation, based on Box 13.17 | Enabling and Disabling Factors for Integrated Governance of Mitigation  
and Adaptation
Ensuring participatory governance and social inclusion. Interlinkages in the food-energy-water nexus highlight the importance 
of inclusive processes (Shaw et al. 2014; Nakano et al. 2017; Cook and Chu 2018; Romero-Lankao and Gnatz 2019). The cultivation of 
urban grassroots innovations and social innovation may accelerate progress (Wolfram and Frantzeskaki 2016), as may the development 
of carefully-designed climate and energy dialogues that enable learning among multiple stakeholders (Cashore et al. 2019).
Considering synergies and trade-offs with broader sustainable development priorities. The explicit consideration of synergies 
and trade-offs will enable more integrated policy making (Dang et al. 2003; von Stechow et al. 2015). Policy frameworks to do so 
are just emerging, such as analysis of trade-offs between energy and water policies and agriculture (Huggel et al. 2015; Antwi-
Agyei et al. 2018). 
Employing a diverse set of tools to reach targets. Building codes, land-use plans, public education initiatives, and nature-based 
solutions such as green ways may impact adaptation and mitigation simultaneously (Burch et al. 2014). Ecological restoration provides 
another suite of tools, for instance the Brazilian target of restoring and reforesting 0.12 million km2 of forests by 2030, which can 
enhance biodiversity and ecosystem services while also sinking carbon (Bustamante et al. 2019). Mandatory retrofits to improve 
indoor air quality can also increase energy efficiency and resilience to climate change impacts (Friel et al. 2011; Houghton 2011).
Monitoring and evaluating key indicators, beyond only greenhouse gas emissions, such as biodiversity, water quality, 
and affordability: An integrated approach requires robust process for collecting data on these indicators. Challenges are related to 
the limited evidence-base on synergies, co-benefits, and trade-offs across sectors and jurisdictions (Di Gregorio et al. 2016; Kongsager 
et al. 2016; Locatelli et al. 2017; Zen et al. 2019). Moreover, adaptation policies mostly lack measurable targets or expected outcomes 
increasing the challenge of designing an integrated framework (OECD 2017).
Iterative and adaptive management. Adaptive management helps to address the underlying uncertainty (Kundzewicz et al. 2018) 
that characterises implementation of integrated approaches to adaptation and mitigation. Policy integration needs to be considered 
iteratively along the process of development, implementation, and evaluation of climate policies. 
Strategic partnerships that coordinate efforts. Strategic partnerships among diverse actors, therefore, bring diverse technical 
skills and capacities to the endeavour (Burch et al. 2016; Islam and Khan 2017). However, realising strategic approaches for joint 
adaptation and mitigation require adequate financial, technical and human resources. 
Participatory and collaborative planning approaches can help overcome injustices and address power differentials. 
Participatory and collaborative planning approaches can provide multiple spaces of deliberation where marginalised voices can be 
heard (Blue and Medlock 2014; UN Habitat 2016; Castán Broto and Westman 2017; Waisman et al. 2019). These tools organise climate 
and sustainability action by addressing its democratic deficit and facilitating the recognition of multiple perspectives in environmental 
planning alongside material limits of development (Agyeman 2013).
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
systemic restructuring. Section  13.9.6 assesses the literature on 
stimulus packages and green new deals which aim for systemic 
change, sometimes with value for climate mitigation. And finally, 
Section 13.9.7 assesses emerging literatures which argues that there 
are existing challenges to accelerating climate mitigation that may 
be overcome by systemic change and targeted actions.
13.9.2 Enabling Acceleration
IPCC AR6 WG3, particularly Chapter  4, following on from the IPCC 
WG3 SR1.5 (IPCC 2018), has highlighted the importance of enabling 
conditions for delivering successful climate mitigation actions. The 
AR6 Glossary term for enabling conditions is: ‘enabling conditions 
include finance, technological innovation, strengthening policy 
instruments,  institutional capacity,  multi-level governance, and changes 
in human behaviour and lifestyles (medium evidence,  high agreement) 
(see Glossary). The IPCC SR1.5 report adds to these six dimensions 
saying enabling conditions also includes ‘inclusive processes, attention 
to power asymmetries and unequal opportunities for development and 
reconsideration of values’ (medium evidence,  high agreement) (IPCC 
2018). Not only is the presence of enabling conditions necessary for 
delivering the successful implementation of single policy instruments 
and policy packages, but also for delivering systemic change (medium 
evidence,  high agreement) (de Coninck et al. 2018; IPCC 2018; Waisman 
et al. 2019). The feasibility of 1.5°C compatible pathways is contingent 
upon enabling conditions for systemic change (medium evidence,  high 
agreement) (de Coninck et al. 2018; Waisman et al. 2019).
At the same time, again following on from SR1.5 report, Section 1.8.1 
explains that there are six feasibility dimensions of successful delivery 
of climate goals. These feasibility dimensions include geophysical; 
environmental and ecological; technological; economic; behaviour 
and lifestyles and institutional dimensions. The presence or absence 
of enabling conditions would affect the feasibility of mitigation 
as well as adaptation pathways and can reduce trade-offs while 
amplifying synergies between options (Waisman et al. 2019). Policies 
and institutions, which are two of the six enabling conditions, are 
therefore central to accelerated mitigation and systemic change. 
Identifying, and ensuring, the presence of all the enabling conditions 
for any given goal, including systemic transformation and acceleration 
of climate mitigation, is an important first step (medium evidence, 
medium agreement) (Roberts et al. 2018; Le Treut et al. 2021; Singh 
and Chudasama 2021). 
13.9.3 Transformative Justice Action 
and Climate Mitigation
Chapter 4 is the lead chapter of this report for justice and climate 
mitigation issues, and includes an overview of institutions which 
have been set up to ensure a Just climate transition (Section 4.5). 
Chapter  13 has sought to integrate justice issues in Section  13.2 
in reference to procedural justice and the impact of inequalities 
on sub-national institutions, Section 13.6 in regard to distribution, 
and Section  13.8 in relation to integrating mitigation and 
adaptation policies.This sub-section introduces the concept of transformative justice 
as part of measures intending to accelerate mitigation. Fair and 
effective climate policymaking requires institutional practices to: 
consider the distributional impacts of climate policy in the design 
and implementation of every policy (Agyeman 2013; Castán Broto 
and Westman 2017); align mitigation with other objectives such as 
inclusion and poverty reduction (Hughes and Hoffmann 2020; Rice 
et al. 2020; Hess and McKane 2021); represent a variety of voices, 
especially those of the most vulnerable (Bullard et al. 2008; Temper 
et al. 2018); and rely on open processes of participation (robust 
evidence, high agreement) (Anguelovski et al. 2016; Bouzarovski 
et al. 2018; Rice et al. 2020).
Distributive approaches to climate justice address injustices related 
to access to resources and protection from impacts. There is an 
important difference between affirmative and transformative justice 
action (Fraser 1995; Agyeman et al. 2016; Castán Broto and Westman 
2019): Affirmative action includes policies and strategies that seek 
to correct inequitable outcomes without disturbing the underlying 
political framework while transformative action seeks to correct 
inequitable outcomes by restructuring the underlying framework that 
produces inequalities. 
Transformative action that responds to distributive justice concerns 
include economy-wide actions via stimulus packages (such as 
the European Green Deal and the New Green Deal in the USA) 
(Section  13.9.5). Other examples are the increasing number of 
climate litigation suits that are transforming the way distributive 
dimensions of climate justice are understood (Section 13.4.2). 
13.9.4 Net Zero Emissions Targets
The last few years have seen a  proliferation of net zero emission 
targets set by national and regional governments, cities as well as 
companies and institutions (NewClimate Institute and Data Driven 
EnviroLab 2020; Black et al. 2021; Rogelj et al. 2021) (see also Cross-
Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 3). Meeting these targets implies economy-
wide systemic change (medium evidence, high agreement).
The Energy & Climate Intelligence Unit (ECIU) Net Zero Tracker divides 
countries into those which have net zero emissions achieved, have it 
in law, have proposed legislation, have it in policy documents or have 
emission reduction targets under discussion in some form. a recent 
study estimated that 131 countries have either adopted, announced 
or are discussing net zero GHG emissions targets, covering 72% of 
global emissions (Höhne et al. 2021). Out of those, as of 1 October 
2021, the ECIU Net Zero Tracker states that Germany, Sweden, the 
European Union, Japan, United Kingdom, France, Canada, South 
Korea, Spain, Denmark, New Zealand, Hungary and Luxembourg 
have net zero targets set in law (ECIU 2021).
Some have argued that the expansion of these emission reduction 
targets marks an important increase in climate mitigation momentum 
since the Paris Agreement of 2015 and the 2018 IPCC Special Report 
on Global Warming of 1.5°C (Black et al. 2021; Höhne et al. 2021). On 
the other hand net zero emission targets in their current state vary 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions13enormously in scope, quality and transparency – with many countries 
at the discussion stage – and this makes scrutiny and comparison 
difficult (NewClimate Institute and Data Driven EnviroLab 2020; 
Black et al. 2021; Rogelj et al. 2021).
In order to realise the mitigation potential of net zero emission 
targets some areas within the targets might need to be changed. For 
example, this includes clearer definitions; well defined time frames 
and scopes; focusing on direct emission reductions within their own 
territory; minimal reliance on offsets; scrutiny of use and risks of CO 2 
removal; attention to equity, near-term action coupled with long-
term intent setting; and ongoing monitoring and review (medium 
evidence, high agreement) (Levin et al. 2020; NewClimate Institute 
and Data Driven EnviroLab 2020; Black et al. 2021; Höhne et al. 2021; 
Rogelj et al. 2021; World Bank 2021b).
13.9.5 Systemic Responses for Climate Mitigation
There is now a significant body of work which explicitly states, or 
implicitly accepts, that systemic change may be necessary to deliver 
successful climate mitigation, including net zero targets. Newell 
phrases this as the difference between ‘plug and play’ mitigation 
applications where one aspect of a  system is changed while 
everything in the system remains the same compared to systemic 
change, with change affecting all the system (Newell 2021a,b). This 
section highlights an emergent, multidisciplinary literature since 
IPCC AR5, which suggests that acceleration to decarbonised systems 
via a sustainable development pathway may be better achieved by 
moving from a single policy instrument or mix of policies approach to 
a systemic economy-wide approach (Figure 13.6). 
The complexity and multi-facetted challenges of rapidly decarbonising 
our current interconnected systems (such as energy, food, health) 
in a  just way has led Michaelowa et al. (2018) to conclude that 
implementation of strong mitigation policy packages that are needed 
requires a systemic change in policymaking.
Multiple modelling assessments of different development and 
mitigation pathways are available. Most of these analyses which lead 
to significant climate mitigation assume significant systemic change 
across social, technological, and economic aspects of a country for 
example, India (Gupta et al. 2020); Japan (Sugiyama et al. 2021) and 
the globe (Rogelj et al. 2015; Dejuán et al. 2020).
UNEP (2020) argued that major, long-term sectoral transformation 
across multiple systems is needed to reach net zero GHG emissions. 
Bernstein and Hoffmann (2019) and Rockström et al. (2017) 
argue that the presence of multi-level, multi-sectoral lock-ins of 
overlapping and interdependent political, economic, technological 
and cultural forces mean that a new approach of coordinated, cross-
economy, systemic climate mitigation is necessary. Creutzig et al. 
(2018) propose a resetting of the approach to consumption and use 
of resources to that of demand side solutions, which would have 
ongoing economy-wide systemic implications.Others focus more on single system reconfigurations, such as the 
energy system (Matthes 2017; Tozer 2020); urban systems (Holtz et al. 
2018); or the political system (Somerville 2020; Newell and Simms 
2020). Becken (2019) argues that only systemic changes at a large 
scale will be sufficient to break or disrupt existing arrangements and 
routines in the tourism industry.
Others argue for thinking about mitigation in even wider ways. O’Brien 
(2018) posits that sector-focused, or a silo approach, to mitigation 
may need to give way to decisions and policies which reach across 
sectoral, geographic and political boundaries and involve a  broad 
set of interrelated processes  – practical, political and personal. 
Gillard et al. (Gillard et al. 2016) argue that a response to climate 
change has to move beyond incremental responses, aiming instead 
for a  society-wide transformation which goes beyond a  system 
perspective to include learning from social theory; while Eyre et al. 
(2018) argue that moving beyond incremental emissions reductions 
will require expanding the focus of efforts beyond the technical to 
include people, and their behaviour and attitudes. Stoddard et al. 
(2021) argue that ‘more sustainable and just futures require a radical 
reconfiguration of long-run socio-cultural and political economic 
norms and institutions’. They focus on nine themes: international 
climate governance, the vested interests of the fossil fuel industry, 
geopolitics and militarism, economics and financialisation, mitigation 
modelling, energy supply systems, inequity, high carbon lifestyles and 
social imaginaries. 
13.9.6 Economy-wide Measures 
Economy-wide stimulus packages which have occurred post 
COVID-19, and in some cases in response to environmental concerns, 
have the ability to undermine or aid climate mitigation (medium 
evidence, high agreement). Attention in the early efforts of their 
development and design can contribute to shifting sustainable 
development pathways and net zero outcomes, while meeting short-
term economic goals (medium evidence, high agreement) (Hepburn 
et al. 2020; Hanna et al. 2020).
Economy-wide packages, as a  way to stimulate and/or restructure 
domestic economies to deliver particular, desired outcomes is 
a widely accepted tool of government (for example the Roosevelt’s 
New Deal packages in the USA between 1933 and 1939). a number 
of country-level stimulus package were put in place after the 2008 
Global Recession, and there was support for a Global Green New Deal 
from UNEP (Steiner 2009; Barbier 2010). Cross-economy structural 
change packages may provide opportunities for another approach to 
accelerate climate mitigation. 
This approach has already been taken up to some degree by 
a  number of countries/blocs. For example, California as well as 
Germany, through the German Energiewende, are early examples of 
a USA state and a country which have tried to link their economies to 
a sustainable future through energy-wide efforts of structural change 
(Morris and Jungjohann 2016; Burger et al. 2020a). 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
In addition to these economy-wide measures, there have since been 
cross-economy Green New Deals implemented such as the European 
Green Deal (Elkerbout et al. 2020; Hainsch et al. 2020; UNEP 2020a) 
(Box 13.1) with calls for other New Deals, for example a Blue New 
Deal (Dundas et al. 2020), or deals to bring together climate and 
justice goals (Hathaway 2020; MacArthur et al. 2020). 
The COVID-19 Pandemic has resulted in global economic recession, 
which many Governments have responded to with economic 
stimulus programmes. See also Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1 on 
COVID-19. It has also led to more analysis of the potential of cross-
economy stimulus packages to benefit climate goals, including what 
lessons can be learned from the stimulus packages put in place as 
a result of the 2008–2009 Global Recession. 
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) reviewed the 
green stimulus plans of the G20 following the 2008–2009 recession 
to examine what worked; what did not; and the lessons which could 
be learnt (Barbier 2010). This work was updated (Barbier 2020) 
and concluded that the constituents of successful green stimulus 
frameworks were long-term commitments in public spending; pricing 
reform; ensuring concerns about affordability were overcome; and 
minimising unwanted distributional impacts. Others argue that 
post-2008 recession stimulus package outcomes benefited both 
environmental and industrial objectives and that a long-term policy 
commitment to the transition to a sustainable, low-carbon economy 
makes sense from both an environmental and industrial strategy 
point of view (Fankhauser et al. 2013). 
With the outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic in 2020, past stimulus 
packages have been further investigated. One study interviewed 

economic multipliers and climate impacts metrics (Hepburn 
et al. 2020). These were expenditure on clean physical infrastructure; 
building energy efficiency retrofits; investment in education and 
training; natural capital investment; and clean R&D. However, the mix 
of effective policies may differ in lower and middle income countries: 
rural support spending was more relevant, while clean R&D was less 
so. The study illuminated that there were different phases to recovery 
packages: the initial ‘rescue’ spending but then a second ‘recovery’ 
phase that can be more fairly rated green or not green. Recovery 
phase policies can deliver both economic and climate goals  – 
co-benefits can be captured (i.e. support for EV infrastructure can 
also reduce local air pollution etc.) – but package design is important 
(Hepburn et al. 2020). 
Others provide a framework which allows a systematic evaluation 
of options, given objectives and indicators, for COVID-19 stimulus 
packages (e.g. Dupont et al. 2020; Jotzo et al. 2020; OECD 2021c). 
Jotzo et al. (2020) conclude that the programmes that most closely 
match green stimulus are afforestation and ecosystem restoration 
programmes, energy efficiency upgrades and RE projects. These type 
of policies provide short-term goals of COVID-19 while also making 
progress on longer terms objectives (Jotzo et al. 2020). The IMF 
concluded that a comprehensive mitigation policy package combining 
carbon pricing and government green infrastructure spending (that 
is partly debt financed) can reduce emissions substantially while boosting economic activity, supporting the recovery from the 
COVID-19 pandemic (Jaumotte et al. 2020).
Conversely, other short-term fiscal or recovery measures in stimulus 
packages may perpetuate high carbon and environmental damaging 
systems. These include fossil fuel based infrastructure investment; 
fiscal incentives for high carbon technologies or projects; waivers 
or roll-backs of environmental regulation; bailouts of fossil fuel 
intensive companies without conditions for low-carbon transitions 
or environmental sustainability (UNEP 2020a; O’Callaghan and 
Murdock 2021; Vivid Economics 2021).
Of the USD17.2 trillion so far spent on stimulus packages, 
USD4.8  trillion (28% of the total as of July 2021) is linked to 
environmental outcomes (Vivid Economics 2021). This study relates 
to 30 countries: the G20 and 10 others. The packages in EU, Denmark, 
Canada, France, Spain, the UK, Sweden, Finland and Germany 
(German Federal Ministry of Finance 2020; Vivid Economics 2021) 
result in net benefits for the environment. a number of studies provide 
differing conclusions with respect to net benefits or otherwise for the 
environment for a number of countries (Climate Action Tracker 2020; 
UNEP 2020a; Vivid Economics 2021). An OECD database found that, 
as of mid-July 2021, 21% of economic recovery spending in OECD, EU 
and Key Partners is allocated to environmentally positive measures 
(OECD 2021c). O’Callaghan and Murdock (2021) reviewed the 

13% of the spend is directed to long-term recovery type measures, of 
which 18% is spent on green recovery. This is a total of 2.5% of total 
spend or 368 billion USD on green initiatives. 
13.9.7 Steps for Acceleration
The multidisciplinary literature exploring how to accelerate 
climate mitigation and transition to low GHG economies and 
systems has grown rapidly over the last few years. Acceleration 
is also confirmed as an important sub-theme of the more specific 
transition literature (Köhler et al. 2019). While literature focusing 
on how to accelerate the impact of climate mitigation is derived 
from empirical evidence, there is very little ex post evidence of 
directed acceleration approaches.
The overlapping discussions of how to accelerate climate mitigation; 
transition to low-carbon economies; and shift development pathways 
depends heavily on country-specific dynamics in political coalitions, 
material endowments, industry strategy, cultural discourses, and civil 
society pressures (Sections 13.2, 13.3, 13.4, 13.7, and 13.8). Ambition 
for acceleration at different scales and stringency (whether for cities, 
country climate policies, country industrial strategies, or national 
economic restructuring) increase governance challenges, including 
coordination across stakeholders, institutions, and scales. ‘There is 
therefore no “one-size-fits-all” blueprint for accelerating low-carbon 
transitions’ (medium evidence, high agreement) (Geels et al. 2017a; 
Roberts et al. 2018).
Markard et al. (2020) describe the key challenges to accelerating 
climate mitigation and sustainability transitions as: 
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions131. The ability for low-carbon innovations to emerge in whole systems. 
Two critical issues need to occur to overcome this challenge 
(i) complementary interactions between different elements. For 
example, in an electricity system, the integration of renewable 
energy requires complementary storage technologies etc. and 
(ii)  changes in system architecture. Thus, in the accelerating 
phase, policy has to shift from stimulating singular innovations 
towards managing wider system transformation. 
2. The need for greater interactions between adjacent systems: 
interactions between multiple systems increases the complexity 
of the transition. Policies are linked to institutions or government 
departments, and they are often compartmentalised into different 
policy areas (e.g. energy policy and transport policy). Increasing 
and coordinating that interaction adds complexity.
3. The resistance from declining industries; acceleration  
of sustainability transitions will involve the phase out of 
unsustainable technologies. As a  result, acceleration towards 
a  sustainability transition may be resisted  – whether business 
models, or where jobs are involved. Political struggles and conflicts 
are an inherent part of accelerating transitions, one strategy to 
deal with this resistance is to accomplish wide societal support 
for long-term transition targets and to form broad constituencies 
of actors in favour of those transitions. 
4. The need for changes in consumer practices and routines; this 
challenge relates to changes in social practices that may be 
required for mainstreaming of sustainable technologies. For 
example, electric vehicles require changes in trip planning and 
refuelling practices. Reducing levels or types of consumption is 
also desirable. 
5. Coordination challenges in policy and governance. There is an 
increasing complexity of governance which can be overcome 
by stronger vertical and horizontal policy coordination 
across systems.
The acceleration literature links two over-arching actions: first, 
a  strategic targeting approach to overcoming the challenges to 
acceleration by a parallel focus on undermining high carbon systems 
while simultaneously encouraging low-carbon systems; and second, 
focusing on a coordinated, cross-economy systemic response, including 
harnessing enabling conditions (robust evidence,  high agreement) 
(Rogelj et al. 2015; Geels et al. 2017b; Hvelplund and Djørup 2017; 
Gomez Echeverri 2018; Markard 2018; Tvinnereim and Mehling 2018; 
O’Brien 2018; Roberts et al. 2018; Hess 2019; Kotilainen et al. 2019; 
Victor et al. 2019; European Environment Agency 2019; Rosenbloom 
and Rinscheid 2020; Newell and Simms 2020; Otto et al. 2020; Strauch 
2020; Burger et al. 2020a; Hsu et al. 2020b; Rosenbloom et al. 2020). 
Strategic targeting, or the identifying of specific intervention points 
(Kanger et al. 2020), points of leverage (Abson et al. 2017), or upward 
cascading tipping points (Sharpe and Lenton 2021), broadly means 
choosing particular actions which will lead to a greater acceleration 
of climate mitigation across systems. For example, Dorninger 
et al.(2020) provide a  quantitative systematic review of empirical 
research addressing sustainability interventions. They take ‘leverage 
points’ – places in complex systems where relatively small changes 
can lead to potentially transformative systemic changes – to classify 
different interventions according to their potential for system-wide transformative change. They argue that ‘deep leverage points’ – the 
goals of a system, its intent, and rules – need to be addressed more 
directly, and they provide analysis of the food and energy systems. 
The strategic choosing of policies and points of intervention is 
linked to the importance of choosing self-reinforcing actions for 
acceleration (Rosenbloom et al. 2018; Butler-Sloss et al. 2021; Sharpe 
and Lenton 2021; Jordan and Moore 2020; Bang 2021). Butler-Sloss 
et al. (2021) explains the types of self-reinforcing actions (or feedback 
loops) which can encourage or undermine rapid transformation of 
energy systems. 
An example of this first overarching action, the strategic targeting of 
the challenges to acceleration, is the focus on undermining carbon- 
intensive systems, thereby reducing opposition to more generalised 
acceleration policies, including the encouragement of low-carbon 
systems (robust evidence, high agreement) (Hvelplund and Djørup 
2017; Rosenbloom 2018; Roberts and Geels 2019; Victor et al. 
2019; Rosenbloom et al. 2020; Rosenbloom and Rinscheid 2020). 
Undermining high carbon systems includes deliberately phasing out 
unsustainable technologies and systems (Kivimaa and Kern 2016; 
David 2017; European Environment Agency 2019; Johnsson et al. 
2019; UNEP 2019b; Carter and McKenzie 2020; Newell and Simms 
2020); confronting the issues of incumbent resistance (Roberts et al. 
2018); and avoiding future emissions and energy excess by reducing 
demand (Rogelj et al. 2015; UNEP 2019b; Victor et al. 2019).
Other strategic goals include tackling the equity and justice issues of 
‘stranded regions’ (Spencer et al. 2018); paying greater attention to 
system architecture to enable increased acceleration to low-carbon 
electricity supply, in this case in the wind industry (McMeekin et al. 
2019); and the importance of maintaining global ecosystem of low-
carbon supply chains (Goldthau and Hughes 2020). 
Other strategic goals combine national and global action. For 
example, global NGO coalitions have formed around strategic policy 
outcomes such as the ‘Keep it in the Ground’ movement (Carter 
and McKenzie 2020), and are supported via coordinated networks, 
such as the Powering Past Coal Alliance (Jewell et al. 2019), and 
with knowledge dissemination, for example, the ‘Fossil Fuel Cuts 
Database’ (Gaulin and Le Billon 2020). 
The second overarching point highlighted by the literature is the 
benefits of focusing on a  coordinated, cross-economy systemic 
response. Coordination is central to this. For example, coordination 
of actions and coherent narratives across sectors and cross 
economy, including within and between all governance levels and 
scales of actions, is beneficial for acceleration (robust evidence, 
high agreement) (Zürn and Faude 2013; Hawkey and Webb 2014; 
Huttunen et al. 2014; Magro et al. 2014; Warren et al. 2016; Köhler 
et al. 2019; Kotilainen et al. 2019; McMeekin et al. 2019; Victor et al. 
2019; Hsu et al. 2020b). Victor et al. (2019) provide a framework of 
how to prioritise the most urgent actions for climate mitigation and 
they give practical case studies of how to improve coordination to 
accelerate reconfiguration of systems for economy-wide climate 
mitigation in sectors such as power; cars; shipping; aviation; 
buildings; cement; and plastics. 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
However, coordination is a  necessary but insufficient condition of 
acceleration. All enabling conditions are required to deliver systemic 
transformation (Section 13.9.2).
Other disciplines argue that social transformation is likely to be 
as important as the technical challenges in a  coordinated, cross-
economy approach to acceleration. For example, some argue for 
social tipping interventions (STI) alongside other technical and 
political interventions so that they can ‘activate contagious processes 
of rapidly spreading technologies, behaviours, social norms, and 
structural reorganisation’ (Otto et al. 2020). They argue that these 
STIs are inter alia: removing fossil fuel subsidies and incentivising 
decentralised energy generation; building carbon neutral cities; 
divesting from assets linked to fossil fuels; revealing the moral 
implications of fossil fuels; strengthening climate education and 
engagement; and disclosing information of GHG emissions (Otto et al. 
2020). Others illuminate the importance of narratives and framings 
in the take-up (or not) of acceleration actions (Sovacool et al. 2020). 
Others are optimistic about the possibilities of transformation but 
also highlight the importance of political economy for rapid and just 
transitions (Newell and Simms 2020; Newell 2021).
In summary, a  synthesis of the multidisciplinary, acceleration 
literature suggests that climate mitigation is a multifaceted problem 
which spans cross-economy and society issues, and that solutions to 
acceleration may lie in coordinated systemic approaches to change 
and strategic targeting of leverage points. Broadly, this literature 
agrees on a dual approach of non-incremental systemic change and 
a targeting of specific acceleration challenges, with tailored actions 
drawing on enabling conditions. The underlying argument of this is 
that there is a strategic logic to focusing on actions which undermine 
high carbon systems at the same time as encouraging low-carbon 
systems. If high carbon systems are weakened then this may 
reduce the opposition to policies and actions aimed at accelerating 
climate mitigation, enabling more support for low-carbon systems. 
In addition, targeting of actions which may create ‘tipping point 
cascades’ which increase the rate of decarbonisation may also be 
beneficial. Finally, new modes of governance may be better suited to 
this approach in the context of transformative change.13.10 Further Research 
Research has expanded in a  number of areas relevant to climate 
mitigation, yet there is considerable scope to add to knowledge. 
Key areas for research exist in climate institutions and governance, 
politics, policies and acceleration of action. In each area there is an 
overarching need for more ex post analysis of impact, more cases 
from the developing world, and understanding how institutions and 
policies work in combination with each other.
13.10.1 Climate Institutions, Governance and Actors
• The different approaches to framework legislation, how it can be 
tailored to country context and evolve over time, how it diffuses 
across countries, and ex post analysis of its impact.
• Approaches to mainstreaming climate governance across sectors 
and at different scales, and developing governmental and non-
governmental capacity to bring about long-term low-carbon 
transformations and associated capacity needs.
• The drivers of sub-national climate action, the scope for 
coordination or leakage with other scales of action, and the 
effect, in practice on GHG outcomes.
• Comparative research on how countries develop NDCs, and 
whether and how that shapes national policy processes.
13.10.2 Climate Politics
• The full range of approaches that governments and non-
governmental actors may take to overcome lock-in to 
carbon-intensive activities including through addressing 
material endowments, cultural values, institutional settings 
and behaviours.
• The factors that influence emergence of popular movements for 
and against climate actions, and their direct and indirect impacts.
• The role of civic organisations in climate governance, including 
religious organisations, consumer groups, indigenous 
communities, labour unions, and development aid organisations. 
• The relationship between climate governance approaches and 
differing political systems, including the role of corruption on 
climate governance. 
• The impacts of media  – traditional and social  – on climate 
mitigation, including the role of disinformation. 
• The role of corporate actors in climate governance across a broad 
range of industries. 
• Systematic comparative research on the differing role of climate 
litigation across various juridical systems.
Chapter 13 National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions1313.10.3 Climate Policies
• Greater ex post empirical studies of mitigation policy outcomes, 
their design features, the impacts of policy instruments under 
different conditions of implementation, especially in developing 
countries. Such research needs to assess the effectiveness, 
economic and distributional effects, co-benefits and side effects, 
and transformational potential of mitigation policies. 
• Understand how packages of policies are designed and 
implemented, including with attention to local context 
and trade-offs.
• Policy design and institutional needs for the explicit purpose of 
net zero transitions. 
• Greater understanding of the differences between, and benefits 
of, policy packages and economy-wide measures for in-system 
and cross-system structural change.
• Policies and packages for emissions sources that are unregulated 
or under-regulated, including industrial and non-CO 2 emissions. 
• The existence and extent of carbon leakage across countries, 
the relative impact of different channels of leakage, and the 
implications of policy instruments designed to address leakage. 
13.10.4 Coordination and Acceleration of Climate Action
• How to ensure a just transition that gains wide popular support 
through research on actual and perceived distributional effects 
across countries and contexts. 
• How to coordinate and integrate for climate mitigation, 
between what actors, sectors, governance scale and goals, and 
how to evaluate.
• Knowledge on the political and policy related links between 
adaptation and mitigation across sectors and countries.
• Further theoretical and empirical research on the necessary 
institutional, cultural, social and political conditions to accelerate 
climate mitigation. 
• How to transform developed and developing economies 
and societies for acceleration, including by shifting 
development pathways.
• The approaches to, and value of, coordinated, cross economy 
structural change, including Green New Deal approaches, as 
a way to accelerate GHG reduction. 
National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions  Chapter 1313
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
FAQ 13.1 |  What roles do national play in climate mitigation, and how can they be effective? 
Institutions and governance underpin mitigation. Climate laws provide the legal basis for action, organisations through which policies 
are developed and implemented, and frameworks through which diverse actors interact. Specific organisations, such as expert 
committees, can inform emission reduction targets, inform the creation of policies and packages, and strengthen accountability. 
Institutions enable strategic thinking, building consensus among stakeholders and enhanced coordination. 
Climate governance is constrained and enabled by countries’ political systems, material endowments and their ideas, values and 
belief systems, which leads to a variety of country-specific approaches to climate mitigation. 
Countries follow diverse approaches. Some countries focus on greenhouse gases emissions by adopting comprehensive climate laws 
and creating dedicated ministries and institutions focused on climate change. Others consider climate change among broader scope 
of policy objectives, such as poverty alleviation, energy security, economic development and co-benefits of climate actions, with the 
involvement of existing agencies and ministries. See also FAQ 13.3 on sub-national climate mitigation.
FAQ 13.2 |  What policies and strategies can be applied to combat climate change?
Institutions can enable creation of mitigation and sectoral policy instruments; policy packages for low-carbon system transition, 
and economy-wide measures for systemic restructuring. Policy instruments to reduce greenhouses gas emissions include economic 
instruments, regulatory instruments and other approaches. 
Economic policy instruments directly influence prices to achieve emission reductions through taxes, permit trading, offset systems, 
subsidies, and border tax adjustments, and are effective in promoting implementation of low-cost emissions reductions. Regulatory 
instruments help achieve specific mitigation outcomes particularly in sectoral applications, by establishing technology or performance 
requirements. Other instruments include information programmes, government provision of goods, services and infrastructure, 
divestment strategies, and voluntary agreements between governments and private firms.
Climate policy instruments can be sector-specific or economy-wide and could be applied at national, regional, or local levels. 
Policymakers may directly target GHG emission reduction or seek to achieve multiple objectives, such as urbanisation or energy 
security, with the effect of reducing emissions. In practice, climate mitigation policy instruments operate in combination with other 
policy tools, and require attention to the interaction effects between instruments. At all levels of governance, coverage, stringency 
and design of climate policies define their efficiency in reducing greenhouse gases emissions.
Policy packages, when designed with attention to interactive effects, local governance context, and harnessed to a clear vision for 
change, are better able to support socio-technical transitions and shifts in development pathways toward low-carbon futures than 
individual policies. See also Chapter 14 on international climate governance. 
FAQ 13.3 |  How can actions at the sub-national level contribute to climate mitigation? 
Sub-national actors (for example individuals, organisations, jurisdictions and networks at regional, local and city levels) often 
have a remit over areas salient to climate mitigation, such as land-use planning, waste management, infrastructure, housing, and 
community development. Despite constraints on legal authority and dependence on national policy priorities in many countries, sub-
national climate change policies exist in more than 120 countries. However, they often lack national support, funding, and capacity, 
and adequate coordination with other scales. Sub-national climate action in support of specific goals is more likely to succeed when 
linked to local issues such as travel congestion alleviation, air pollution control.
The main drivers of climate actions at sub-national levels include high levels of citizen concern, jurisdictional authority and funding, 
institutional capacity, national level support and effective linkage to development objectives. Sub-national governments often 
initiate and implement policy experiments that could be scaled to other levels of governance.