
International cooperation is having positive and measurable 
results (high confidence). The Kyoto Protocol led to measurable 
and substantial avoided emissions, including in 20 countries with 
Kyoto first commitment period targets that have experienced 
a  decade of declining absolute emissions. It also built national 
capacity for greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting, catalysed the 
creation of GHG markets, and increased investments in low-carbon 
technologies (medium confidence). Other international agreements 
and institutions have led to avoided carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions 
from land use practices, as well as avoided emissions of some non-
CO2 greenhouse gases (medium confidence). {14.3, 14.5, 14.6}
New forms of international cooperation have emerged 
since the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
Fifth Assessment Report (IPCC AR5) in line with an evolving 
understanding of effective mitigation policies, processes, and 
institutions. Both new and pre-existing forms of cooperation 
are vital for achieving climate mitigation goals in the context 
of sustainable development (high confidence). While previous 
IPCC assessments have noted important synergies between 
the outcomes of climate mitigation and achieving sustainable 
development objectives, there now appear to be synergies between 
the two processes themselves (medium confidence). Since AR5, 
international cooperation has shifted towards facilitating national-
level mitigation action through numerous channels. These now 
include both processes established under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) regime and 
regional and sectoral agreements and organisations. {14.2, 14.3, 
14.5, 14.6}
Participation in international agreements and transboundary 
networks is associated with the adoption of climate policies 
at the national and sub-national levels, as well as by non-state 
actors (high confidence). International cooperation helps countries 
achieve long-term mitigation targets when it supports development 
and diffusion of low-carbon technologies, often at the level of 
individual sectors, which can simultaneously lead to significant 
benefits in the areas of sustainable development and equity (medium 
confidence). {14.2, 14.3, 14.5, 14.6}
International cooperation under the United Nations (UN) 
climate regime has taken an important new direction with 
the entry into force of the 2015 Paris Agreement, which 
strengthened the objective of the UN climate regime, 
including its long-term temperature goal, while adopting 
a  different architecture from that of the Kyoto Protocol to 
achieve it (high confidence). The core national commitments 
under the Kyoto Protocol have been legally binding quantified 
emission targets for developed countries tied to well-defined 
mechanisms for monitoring and enforcement. By contrast, the 
commitments under the Paris Agreement are primarily procedural, 
extend to all Parties, and are designed to trigger domestic policies 
and measures, enhance transparency, stimulate climate investments, 
particularly in developing countries, and to lead iteratively to rising 
levels of ambition across all countries (high confidence). Issues of equity remain of central importance in the UN climate regime, 
notwithstanding shifts in the operationalisation of ‘common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities’ from Kyoto 
to Paris (high confidence). {14.3} 
There are conflicting views on whether the Paris Agreement’s 
commitments and mechanisms will lead to the attainment of 
its stated goals. Arguments in support of the Paris Agreement are 
that the processes it initiates and supports will in multiple ways lead, 
and indeed have already led, to rising levels of ambition over time. 
The recent proliferation of national mid-century net zero GHG targets 
can be attributed in part to the Paris Agreement (medium confidence). 
Moreover, its processes and commitments will enhance countries’ 
abilities to achieve their stated level of ambition, particularly among 
developing countries (medium confidence). Arguments against 
the Paris Agreement are that it lacks a  mechanism to review the 
adequacy of individual Parties’ Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs), that collectively current NDCs are inconsistent in their level 
of ambition with achieving the Paris Agreement’s temperature goal, 
that its processes will not lead to sufficiently rising levels of ambition 
in the NDCs, and that NDCs will not be achieved because the targets, 
policies and measures they contain are not legally binding at the 
international level (medium confidence). To some extent, arguments 
on both sides are aligned with different analytic frameworks, 
including assumptions about the main barriers to mitigation that 
international cooperation can help overcome (medium confidence). 
The extent to which countries increase the ambition of their NDCs 
and ensure they are effectively implemented will depend in part 
on the successful  implementation of the support mechanisms in 
the Paris Agreement, and in turn will determine whether the goals 
of the Paris Agreement are met (high confidence). {14.2, 14.3, 14.4} 
International cooperation outside the UNFCCC processes 
and agreements provides critical support for mitigation 
in particular regions, sectors and industries, for particular 
types of emissions, and at the sub- and transnational levels 
(high confidence). Agreements addressing ozone depletion, 
transboundary air pollution, and release of mercury are all leading 
to reductions in the emissions of specific greenhouse gases (high 
confidence). Cooperation is occurring at multiple governance levels 
including cities. Transnational partnerships and alliances involving 
non-state and sub-national actors are also playing a  growing role 
in stimulating low-carbon technology diffusion and emissions 
reductions (medium confidence). Such transnational efforts include 
those focused on climate litigation; the impacts of these are unclear 
but promising. Climate change is being addressed in a  growing 
number of international agreements operating at sectoral levels, 
as well as within the practices of many multilateral organisations 
and institutions (high confidence). Sub-global and regional 
cooperation, often described as climate clubs, can play an important 
role in accelerating mitigation, including the potential for reducing 
mitigation costs through linking national carbon markets, although 
actual examples of these remain limited (high confidence). {14.2, 
14.4, 14.5, 14.6} 
International cooperation will need to be strengthened in 
several key respects in order to support mitigation action 
in the context of sustainable development and equity (high 
confidence). Many developing countries’ NDCs have components 
or additional actions that are conditional on receiving assistance 
with respect to finance, technology development and transfer, and 
capacity building, greater than what has been provided to date (high 
confidence). Sectoral and sub-global cooperation is providing critical 
support, and yet there is room for further progress. In some cases, 
notably with respect to aviation and shipping, sectoral agreements 
have adopted climate mitigation goals that fall far short of what 
would be required to achieve the temperature goal of the Paris 
Agreement (high confidence). Moreover, there are cases where 
international cooperation may be hindering mitigation efforts, 
namely evidence that trade and investment agreements, as well as 
agreements within the energy sector, impede national mitigation 
efforts (medium confidence). International cooperation is emerging 
but so far fails to fully address transboundary issues associated with 
Solar Radiation Modification and CO 2 removal (high confidence). 
{14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5, 14.6}
This chapter assesses the role and effectiveness of international 
cooperation in mitigating climate change. Such cooperation includes 
multilateral global cooperative agreements among nation states such 
as the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), and its related legal instruments, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol 
and the 2015 Paris Agreement, but also plurilateral agreements 
involving fewer states, as well as those focused on particular economic 
and policy sectors, such as components of the energy system. 
Moreover, this chapter assesses the role of transnational agreements 
and cooperative arrangements between non-state and sub-national 
actors, including municipal governments, private sector firms and 
industry consortia, and civil society organisations. This chapter does 
not assess international cooperation within the European Union, as 
this is covered in Chapter 13 of this report.
Past IPCC assessment reports have discussed the theoretical literature, 
providing insights into the rationale for international cooperation, as 
well as guidance as to its structure and implementation. This chapter 
limits such theoretical discussion primarily to the new developments 
since the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). Important developments in 
this respect include attention to climate clubs (groups of countries and 
potentially non-state actors that can work together to achieve particular 
objectives), and the effects of framing the global climate change 
mitigation challenge as one of accelerating a socio-technical transition 
or transformation, shifting development pathways accordingly, in 
addition to (or rather than) solving a global commons problem. This 
chapter draws from theory to identify a set of criteria by which to assess 
the effectiveness of existing forms of international cooperation.
The rest of this chapter describes existing cooperative international 
agreements, institutions, and initiatives with a view to clarifying how 
they operate, what effects they have, and ultimately, whether they 
work. At the heart of this international institutional architecture lies 
the Paris Agreement, which sets the overall approach for international 
cooperation under the UNFCCC at the global level. In many ways, 
the Paris Agreement reshapes the structure of such cooperation, 
from one oriented primarily towards target setting, monitoring, and 
enforcement, to one that is oriented towards supporting and enabling 
nationally determined actions (including targets), monitoring as well 
as catalysing non-state and sub-national actions at multiple levels 
of governance. In addition to the Paris Agreement, many forms of 
cooperation have taken shape in parallel: those designed to address 
other environmental problems that have a  significant impact on 
climate mitigation; those operating at the sub-global or sectoral 
level; and those where the main participants are non-state actors. 
The chapter ends with an overall assessment of the effectiveness of 
current international cooperation and identifies areas that would 
benefit from improved and enhanced action.
14.1.1 Key Findings From the Fifth Assessment Report
The AR5 found that two characteristics of climate change make 
international cooperation essential: that it is a  global commons 
problem that needs to be addressed in a  coordinated fashion at the global scale;  and  that given the global diversity with respect 
to  opportunities for and cost of mitigation, there are economic 
efficiencies associated with cooperative solutions (Section  13.2.1.1). 
Consequently, AR5 found  evidence  to  suggest that climate policies 
that are implemented across geographical regions would be more 
effective in terms of both their environmental consequences and 
their economic costs (Sections 13.6, 13.13 and 14.4). The AR5 also 
suggested  that regional cooperation  could  offer opportunities 
beyond what countries may be able to achieve by themselves. These 
opportunities are due to geographic proximity, shared infrastructure 
and policy frameworks, trade, and cross-border investments, and 
examples included renewable energy pools across borders, networks 
of energy infrastructure and coordinated forestry policies (Sections 1.2, 
6.6, 14.2 and 15.2). The AR5 also suggested that policy linkages exist 
across regional, national, and sub-national scales (Sections 13.3.1 and 
13.5.1.3). For these reasons, AR5 suggested that although the UNFCCC 
remains the primary international forum for climate negotiations, 
many other institutions engaged at the global, regional, and local 
levels do and should play an active role (Sections  13.3.1, 13.4.1.4 
and 13.5).  AR5 also noted that the inclusion of climate change 
issues across a variety of forums often creates institutional linkages 
between mitigation and adaptation (Sections 13.3–13.5). In addition 
to centralised cooperation and governance, with a primary focus on 
the UNFCCC and its associated institutions, AR5 noted the emergence 
of new transnational climate-related institutions of decentralised 
authority such as public-private sector partnerships, private sector 
governance initiatives, transnational non-governmental organisation 
(NGO) programmes, and city-led initiatives (Sections 13.2, 13.3.1 and 
13.12). It noted that these have resulted in a multiplicity of cooperative 
efforts in the form of multilateral agreements, harmonised national 
policies and decentralised but coordinated  national  and  regional 
policies (Sections 13.3.2, 13.4.1 and 14.4). Finally, it suggested that 
international cooperation may  also  have a  role in promoting active 
engagement of the private sector in technological innovation and 
cooperative efforts leading to technology transfer and the development 
of new technologies (Sections 13.3, 13.9 and 13.12). 
14.1.2 Developments Since the Fifth Assessment Report 
14.1.2.1 Negotiation of the Paris Agreement 
The key development since AR5 has been the negotiation and 
adoption of the Paris Agreement, which, building on the UNFCCC, 
introduces a new approach to global climate governance. This new 
approach, as discussed below (Section  14.3.1.1), is driven by the 
need to engage developing countries in emissions reductions beyond 
those they had taken on voluntarily under the Cancun Agreements, 
extend mitigation commitments to those developed countries that 
had rejected or withdrawn from the Kyoto Protocol, and to respond to 
the rapidly changing geopolitical context (Section 14.3.1.2). 
14.1.2.2 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 
Sustainable Development Goals
It has long been clear that a failure to mitigate climate change would 
exacerbate existing poverty, accentuate vulnerability and worsen 
harmonise mitigation actions with those oriented towards social and 
economic development. A key development since AR5 is the adoption 
in 2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which 
contains 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This Agenda 
offers an aspirational narrative, coherent framework and actionable 
agenda for addressing diverse issues of development through goals 
that balance the economic, social and environmental dimensions 
of sustainable development as well as issues of governance and 
institutions (ICSU ISSC 2015). Scholars have noted that these 
dimensions of sustainable development are inter-dependent (Nilsson 
et al. 2016), and, as such it is difficult if not impossible to achieve 
economic and social gains while neglecting environmental concerns, 
including climate change (Le Blanc 2015). The SDGs are closely 
linked to the Paris Agreement, adopted a few weeks later. There is 
a growing body of literature that examines the interlinkages between 
SDGs, including SDG 13 (taking urgent action to combat climate 
change) and others, concluding that without a proper response to 
climate change, success in many of the other SDGs would be difficult 
if not impossible (ICSU ISSC 2015; Le Blanc 2015; Nilsson et al. 
2016; Weitz et al. 2018). Likewise, failure to achieve the SDGs will 
have a detrimental effect on the ability to limit climate change to 
manageable levels. Initiatives such as The World in 2050 (TWI2050 
2018), a large research initiative by a global consortium of research 
and policy institutions, work on the premise that pursuing climate 
action and sustainable development in an integrated and coherent 
way, based on a sound understanding of development pathways and 
dynamics, is the strongest approach to enable countries to achieve 
their objectives in both agreements.
14.1.2.3 IPCC Special Reports
Further key developments since AR5 include the release of three 
IPCC special reports. The first of these assessed the differential 
impacts of limiting climate change to 1.5°C global average warming 
compared to 2°C warming, indicated the emissions reductions and 
enabling conditions necessary to stay within this limit (IPCC 2018a). 
While the events that have unfolded since the report are not yet 
comprehensively documented in literature, arguably the report has 
led to a  renewed perception of the urgency of climate mitigation 
(Wolf et al. 2019). In particular, the report appears to have crystalised 
media coverage in some parts of the world around a need to reduce 
emissions to net zero by 2050 (whether of GHGs or CO 2), rather than 
delaying such reductions until the latter half of the century, as had 
been previously understood and indicated in the Paris Agreement. 
Its release is hence one factor explaining the rise in transnational 
climate mobilisation efforts (Boykoff and Pearman 2019). It has also 
played a  role, in addition to the Paris Agreement (Geden 2016a), 
in the numerous announcements, pledges and indications by 
governments, including by all G7 countries, of their adoption of net 
zero GHG targets for 2050. The other two special reports focused on 
ocean and the cryosphere (IPCC 2019a), and the potential of land-
related responses to contribute to adaptation and mitigation (IPCC 
2019b). There has been no literature directly tying the publication 
of these latter two reports to changes in international cooperation. 
However, the 25th UNFCCC Conference of Parties in Madrid in 2019 
convened a  dialogue on ocean and climate change to consider how to strengthen mitigation and adaptation action in this context 
(UNFCCC 2019a, para. 31).
14.2 Evaluating International Cooperation
This section describes recent insights from social science theory that 
can shed light on the need for and ideal structure of international 
cooperation. This section starts by describing developments in 
framing the underlying problem, moves towards a  body of theory 
describing the benefits of multilateral sub-global action, and ends 
with a theory-based articulation of criteria to assess the effectiveness 
of international cooperation.
14.2.1 Framing Concepts for Assessment  
of the Paris Agreement
Previous IPCC reports have framed international climate cooperation, 
and indeed climate mitigation more generally, primarily as addressing 
a global commons problem (Stavins et al. 2014). In this report, by 
contrast, multiple framings are considered. Chapter  1  introduces 
four analytic frameworks: aggregated economic approaches such as 
cost-benefit analysis, which maps onto the global commons framing; 
ethical approaches; analysis of transitions and transformations; and 
psychology and politics of changing course. Here, we highlight some 
of the findings that are of relevance to international cooperation.
When applied to the international context, the public good (or global 
commons) framing stresses that the incentives for mitigation at 
the global level are greater than they are for any single country, since 
the latter does not enjoy the benefits of its own mitigation efforts 
that accrue outside its own borders (Stavins et al. 2014; Patt 2017). 
This framing does not preclude countries engaging in mitigation, 
even ambitious mitigation, but it suggests that these countries’ level 
of ambition and speed of abatement would be greater if they were 
part of a cooperative agreement. 
Theoretical economists have shown that reaching such a  global 
agreement is difficult, due to countries’ incentives to free-ride, 
namely benefit from other countries’ abatement efforts while 
failing to abate themselves (Barrett 1994; Gollier and Tirole 2015). 
Numerical models that integrate game theoretic concepts, whether 
based on optimal control theory or on dynamic programming, 
consistently confirm this insight, at least in the absence of transfers 
(Germain et al. 2003; Lessmann et al. 2015; Chander 2017). Recent 
contributions suggest that regional or sectoral agreements, or 
agreements focused on a  particular subset of GHGs, can be seen 
as building blocks towards a global approach (Asheim et al. 2006; 
Froyn and Hovi 2008; Sabel and Victor 2017; Stewart et al. 2017). In 
a  dynamic context, this gradual approach through building blocks 
can alleviate the free-riding problem and ultimately lead to global 
cooperation (Caparrós and Péreau 2017). Much of this literature is 
subsumed under the concept of ‘climate clubs’ described in the next 
section. Other developments based on dynamic game theory suggest 
that the free-riding problem can be mitigated if the treaties do not 
prescribe countries’ levels of green investment and the duration of 
riders with a  short-term agreement where green investments will 
be insufficient due to the hold-up problem (Battaglini and Harstad 
2016). Finally, thresholds and potential climate catastrophes have 
also been shown, theoretically and numerically, to reduce free-riding 
incentives, especially for countries that may become pivotal in failing 
to avoid the threshold (Barrett 2013; Emmerling et al. 2020).
In addition to mitigation in the form of emissions abatement, 
innovation in green technologies also has public good features, 
leading for the same reasons to less innovation than would be 
globally ideal (Jaffe et al. 2005). Here as well, theory suggests that 
there are benefits from cooperation on technology development 
at the regional or sectoral levels, but also that cooperation on 
technology, especially for breakthrough technologies, may prove 
to be easier than for abatement (El-Sayed and Rubio 2014; Rubio 
2017). In a dynamic context, the combination of infrastructure lock-
in, network effects with high switching cost, and dynamic market 
failures suggests that deployment and adoption of clean technologies 
is path dependent (Acemoglu et al. 2012; Aghion et al. 2014), with 
a  multiplicity of possible equilibria. This implies that no outcome 
is guaranteed, although the most likely pathway will depend on 
economic expectations and initial conditions of the innovation 
process (Krugman 1991). Therefore, the government has a  role 
to play, either by shifting expectations (e.g., credibly committing to 
climate policy), or by changing initial conditions (e.g.,  investing in 
green infrastructure or subsidising clean energy research) (Acemoglu 
et al. 2012; Aghion et al. 2014). This result is exacerbated by the 
irreversibility of energy investments and the extremely long periods 
of operation of the typical energy investment (Caparrós et al. 2015; 
Baldwin et al. 2020).
While the public goods and global commons framing concentrates 
on free-riding incentives as the primary barrier to mitigation taking 
place at a pace that would be globally optimal, other factors arise 
across the four analytic frameworks. For example, within the political 
framework, Beiser-McGrath and Bernauer (2021) highlight that not 
just the incentive to free-ride, but also the knowledge that another 
major emitter is free-riding, could lessen a country’s political incentive 
to mitigate. Aklin and Mildenberger (2020) present evidence to 
suggest that distributive conflict within countries, rather than free-
riding across countries, is the primary barrier to ambitious national-
level action. Another barrier could be a lack of understanding and 
experience with particular policy approaches; there is evidence that 
participation in cooperative agreements could facilitate information 
exchange across borders and lead to enhanced mitigation policy 
adoption (Rashidi and Patt 2018).
The analytic approach focusing on transitions and transformation 
focuses on path-dependent processes as an impediment to the shift 
to low-carbon technologies and systems. Cross-Chapter Box 12 on 
Transition Dynamics (Chapter  16) summarises the key points of 
this literature. This chapter describes how the two framings focus 
on different indicators of progress, and potentially different types 
of cooperative action within the international context. This chapter 
highlights in later sections conflicting views on whether the Paris 
Agreement is likely to prove effective (Section  14.3.3.2). To some extent, the dichotomy of views aligns with the two framings: analysis 
implicitly aligned with the global commons framing is negative about 
the Paris architecture, whereas that aligned with the transitions 
framing is more positive (Kern and Rogge 2016; Patt 2017; Roberts 
et al. 2018).
Within the global commons framing, the primary indicator of 
progress is the actual level of GHG emissions, and the effectiveness 
of policies can be measured in terms of whether such emissions rise 
or fall (Patt 2017; Hanna and Victor 2021). The fact that the sum of 
all countries’ emissions has continued to grow (IPCC 2018a), even 
as there has been a  global recognition that they should decline, 
is seen as being consistent with the absence of a  strong global 
agreement. Within this framing, there is traditionally an emphasis on 
treaties’ containing self-enforcing agreements (Olmstead and Stavins 
2012), ideally through binding commitments, as a  way of dealing 
with the overarching problem of free-ridership (Barrett 1994; Finus 
and Caparrós 2015; Tulkens 2019). However, as discussed above, 
the emphasis has now shifted to a gradual cooperation approach, 
either regional or sectoral, as an alternative way of dealing with free-
riding incentives (Caparrós and Péreau 2017; Sabel and Victor 2017; 
Stewart et al. 2017). The gradual linkage of emissions trading systems 
(discussed in Section 14.4.4), goes in the same direction. There is also 
literature suggesting that the diversity of the countries involved may 
in fact be an asset to reduce the free-rider incentive (Pavlova and De 
Zeeuw 2013; Finus and McGinty 2019), which argues in favour of 
a system where all countries, irrespectively of their income levels, are 
fully involved in mitigation, unlike the Kyoto Protocol and in line with 
the Paris Agreement. Finally, recent efforts have discussed potential 
synergies between mitigation and adaptation efforts in a strategic 
context (Bayramoglu et al. 2018) (Section  14.5.1.2) In general, 
current efforts go beyond considering climate policy as a mitigation-
only issue, much in line with the discussion about linkages between 
climate change and sustainable development policies described in 
detail in Chapters 1 and 4 of this report. 
In the transitions framing, by contrast, global emissions levels are 
viewed as the end (and often greatly delayed) result of a  large 
number of transformative processes. International cooperation may 
be effective at stimulating such processes, even if a change in global 
emissions is not yet evident, implying that short-term changes in 
emissions levels may be a misleading indicator of progress towards 
long-term goals (Patt 2017). Hanna and Victor (2021) suggest 
a  particular focus on technical advances and deployment patterns 
in niche low-carbon technologies, such as wind and solar power, 
and electric vehicles. However, this is one among many suggestions: 
the literature does not identify a single clear indicator to use, and 
there are many metrics of technological progress and transformation, 
described in Section 16.3.3 of this report. These can include national-
level emissions among countries participating in particular forms of 
cooperation, as well as leading indicators of such emissions such as 
changes in low-carbon technology deployment and cost. 
Just as the transition framing highlights indicators of progress other 
than global emissions, it de-emphasises the importance of achieving 
cost-effectiveness with respect to global emissions. Hence, this strand 
of the literature does not generally support the use of international 
processes within countries that are key drivers of technological 
change (Cullenward and Victor 2020). For similar reasons, achieving 
cross-sectoral cost-effectiveness, a goal of many carbon markets, is 
not seen as a high priority. Instead, within the transitions framing, 
the emphasis with respect to treaty design is often on providing 
mechanisms to support Parties’ voluntary actions, such as with 
financial and capacity-building support for new technologies and 
technology regimes (Victor et al. 2019). The transitions literature also 
highlights impediments to transformation as being sector specific, 
and hence the importance of international cooperation addressing 
sector-specific issues (Victor et al. 2019). While such attention 
often starts with promoting innovation and diffusion of low-carbon 
technologies that are critical to a sector’s functioning, it often ends 
with policies aimed at phasing out the high-carbon technologies 
once they are no longer needed (Markard 2018). In line with this, 
many scholars have suggested value in supply-side international 
agreements, aimed at phasing out the production and use of fossil 
fuels (Collier and Venables 2014; Piggot et al. 2018; Asheim et al. 
2019; Newell and Simms 2020).
Analytic approaches centred on equity and development figure 
prominently within this report, with many of the key concepts 
addressed in Chapter  4. Primarily the focus is on aligning climate 
policy at the international level with efforts to shift development 
pathways towards improved quality of life and greater sustainability 
(Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 4). There are also overlaps between 
the equity framework and the others. Within the global commons 
framing, the emphasis is on international carbon markets to 
reduce the costs from climate policies, and as way of generating 
financial flows to developing countries (Michaelowa et al. 2019a). 
The transitions framing, while focused empirically primarily on 
industrialised countries, nevertheless aligns with an understanding of 
climate mitigation taking place within a wider development agenda; 
in many cases it is a lack of development that creates a barrier to rapid 
system transformation, which international cooperation can address 
(Delina and Sovacool 2018) (Cross-Chapter Box 12 in Chapter 16).14.2.2 Climate Clubs and Building Blocks
A recent development in the literature on international climate 
governance has been increased attention to the potential for climate 
clubs (Victor 2011). Hovi et al. (2016) define these as ‘any international 
actor group that (1) starts with fewer members than the UNFCCC 
has and (2) aims to cooperate on one or more climate change-
related activities, notably mitigation, adaptation, climate engineering 
or climate compensation’. While providing public goods (such as 
mitigation), they also offer member-only benefits (such as preferential 
tariff rates) to entice membership. In practice, climate clubs are sub-
global arrangements, and formal agreement by interstate treaty is not 
a prerequisite. Actors do not have to be states, although in the literature 
on climate clubs states have hitherto dominated. The literature has an 
essentially static dimension that focuses on the incentives for actors 
to join such a club, and a dynamic one which focuses on the ‘building 
blocks’ for global cooperative agreements. 
The literature focusing on the static aspects of clubs highlight that 
they represent ‘coalitions of the willing’ (Falkner 2016a; Gampfer 
2016; Falkner et al. 2021), which offer a package of benefits, part of 
which are pure public goods (available also to non-club members), 
and others are club benefits that are only available to members (Hovi 
et al. 2016). The members-only or excludable part can be a system 
of transfers within the club to compensate the countries with higher 
costs. For example, the benefit from participating in the club can be to 
have access to a common emissions trading system, which in general 
is more attractive the larger the diversity of the countries involved, 
although this is not a general result, as discussed in detail in Doda 
and Taschini (2017). However, as costs and effort-sharing agreements 
are unsuccessful in a static context (Barrett 1994), mainly due to free-
rider incentives, several studies have proposed using tariffs on trade 
or other forms of sanctions to reduce incentives for free-riding (Helm 
and Sprinz 2000; Eyland and Zaccour 2012; Anouliès 2015; Nordhaus 
2015; Al Khourdajie and Finus 2020). For example, Nordhaus (2015) 
uses a  coalition formation game model to show that a  uniform 
percentage tariff on the imports from nonparticipants into the club 
region (at a relatively low tariff rate of about 2%) can induce high 
participation within a range of carbon price values. More recently, 
Al Khourdajie and Finus (2020) show that border carbon adjustments 
Table 14.1 | Key climate club static modelling results.
Aakre et al. (2018) Nordhaus (2015) Hovi et al. (2017);  
Sprinz et al. (2018) Sælen (2020);  
Sælen et al. (2020) 
ScopeTransboundary black carbon and 
methane in the ArcticGlobal emissions Global emissions Global emissions
Modelling methodTM5-FASST model (‘reduced-form air 
quality and impact evaluation tool’)C-DICE (coalition formation game based on 
a static version of the multiregional DICE-
RICE optimisation model) Agent-based model Agent-based model
Border tax adjustment No Yes No No
Key resultsBlack carbon can be more easily 
controlled than methane, based on 
self-interest; inclusion of non-Arctic 
Council major polluters desirable to 
control pollutantsFor non-participants in mitigation efforts, 
modest tariffs on trade are advised to 
stabilise coalition formation for emissions 
reductionsClimate clubs can substantially 
reduce GHG emissions, provided 
club goods are present. The 
(potential) departure of a single 
major actor (e.g., USA) reduces 
emissions coverage, yet is rarely 
fatal to the existence of the club The architecture of the Paris 
Agreement will achieve the 2°C 
goal only under a very fortunate 
constellation of parameters. 
Potential withdrawal (e.g., USA) 
further reduces these chances 
considerably
agreement, including full participation. Table 14.1 presents a number 
of key results related to climate clubs from a static context.
In a  dynamic context, the literature on climate clubs highlights the 
co-called ‘building blocks’ approach (Stewart et al. 2013a,b, 2017). 
This is a bottom-up strategy designed to create an array of smaller-
scale, specialised initiatives for transnational cooperation in particular 
sectors and/or geographic areas with a wide range of participants. As 
part of this literature, Potoski and Prakash (2013) provide a conceptual 
overview of voluntary environmental clubs, showing that many climate 
clubs do not require demanding obligations for membership and that 
a  substantial segment thereof are mostly informational (Weischer 
et al. 2012; Andresen 2014). Also crafted onto the building blocks 
approach, Potoski (2017) demonstrates the theoretical potential for 
green certification and green technology clubs. Green (2017) further 
highlights the potential of ‘pseudo-clubs’ with fluid membership 
and limited member benefits to promote the diffusion and uptake 
of mitigation standards. Falkner et al. (2021) suggest a  typology of 
normative, bargaining, and transformational clubs. Before the adoption 
of the Paris Agreement, some literature suggested that the emergence 
of climate clubs in parallel to the multilateral climate regime would lead 
to ‘forum shopping’, with states choosing the governance arrangement 
that best suits their interests (McGee and Taplin 2006; van Asselt 
2007; Biermann et al. 2009; Oh and Matsuoka 2017). However, more 
recent literature suggests that climate clubs complement rather than 
challenge the international regime established by the UNFCCC (van 
Asselt and Zelli 2014; Falkner 2016a; Draguljić 2019). 
In this dynamic context, one question is whether to negotiate a single 
global agreement or to start with smaller agreements in the hope that 
they will eventually evolve into a larger agreement. It has been debated 
extensively in the context of free trade whether a multilateral (global) 
negotiating approach is preferable to a  regional approach, seen as 
a building block towards global free trade. Aghion et al. (2007) analysed 
this issue formally for trade, showing that a  leader would always 
choose to move directly to a global agreement. In the case of climate 
change, it appears that even the mildest form of club discussed above 
(an efforts and costs sharing agreement, as in the case of the linkage 
of emissions trading systems) can yield global cooperation following 
a building blocks approach, and that the sequential path relying on 
building blocks may be the only way to reach global cooperation over 
time (Caparrós and Péreau 2017). While the existence of a  nearly 
universal agreement such as the Paris Agreement may arguably have 
rendered this discussion less relevant, the Paris Agreement co-exists, 
and will likely continue to do so, with a  multitude of sectoral and 
regional agreements, meaning that this discussion is still relevant for 
the evolution of these complementary regimes. 
Results based on an agent-based model suggest that climate clubs 
result in major emissions reductions if there is a  sufficiently high 
provision of the club good and if initial membership by several states 
with sufficient emissions weight materialises. Such configurations 
allow the club to grow over time to enable effective global action 
(Hovi et al. 2017). The departure of a  major emitter (specifically 
the United States) triggered a scientific discussion on the stability of 
the Paris Agreement. Sprinz et al. (2018) explore whether climate clubs are stable against a leader willing to change its status, for example, 
from leader to follower, or even completely leaving the climate club, 
finding in most cases such stability to exist. Related studies on the 
macroeconomic incentives for climate clubs by Paroussos et al. 
(2019) show that climate clubs are reasonably stable, both internally 
and externally (i.e., no member willing to leave and no new member 
willing to join), and climate clubs that include obligations in line 
with the 2°C goal combined with financial incentives can facilitate 
technology diffusion. The authors also show that preferential trade 
arrangements for low-carbon goods can reduce the macroeconomic 
effects of mitigation policies. Aakre et al. (2018) show numerically 
that small groups of countries can limit black carbon in the Arctic, 
driven mainly for reasons of self-interest, yet reducing methane 
requires larger coalitions due to its larger geographical dispersal and 
requires stronger cooperation.
14.2.3 Assessment Criteria 
This section identifies a set of criteria for assessing the effectiveness 
of international cooperation, which is applied later in the chapter. 
Lessons from the implementation of other multilateral environmental 
agreements (MEAs) can provide some guidance. There is considerable 
literature on this topic, most of which predates AR5, and which will 
therefore not be covered in detail. Issues include ways to enhance 
compliance, and the fact that a  low level of compliance with an 
MEA does not necessarily mean that the MEA has no effect (Downs 
et al. 1996; Victor et al. 1998; Weiss and Jacobson 1998). Recent 
research examines effectiveness from the viewpoint of the extent to 
which an MEA influences domestic action, including the adoption of 
implementing legislation and policies (Brandi et al. 2019). 
Many have pointed to the Montreal Protocol, addressing stratospheric 
ozone loss, as an example of a  successful treaty because of its 
ultimate environmental effectiveness, and relevance for solving 
climate change. Scholarship emerging since AR5 emphasises that 
the Paris Agreement has a greater ‘bottom-up’ character than many 
other MEAs, including the Montreal or Kyoto Protocols, allowing for 
more decentralised ‘polycentric’ forms of governance that engage 
diverse actors at the regional, national and sub-national levels 
(Ostrom 2010; Jordan et al. 2015; Falkner 2016b; Victor 2016). 
Given the differences in architecture, lessons drawn from studies 
of MEA regimes need to be supplemented with assessments of the 
effectiveness of cooperative efforts at other governance levels and in 
other forums. Emerging research in this area proposes methodologies 
for this task (Hsu et al. 2019a). Findings highlight the persistence 
of similar imbalances between developed and developing countries 
as at the global level, as well as the need for more effective ways 
to incentivise private sector engagement in transnational climate 
governance (Chan et al. 2018).
While environmental outcomes and economic performance have 
been long-standing criteria for assessment of effectiveness, 
the other elements deserve some note. It is the case that the 
achievement of climate objectives, such as limiting global average 
warming to 1.5°C–2°C, will require the transition from high- to 
low-carbon technologies and the transformation of the sectors 
Such transformations are not linear processes, and hence many of 
the early steps taken –  such as supporting early diffusion of new 
renewable energy technologies – will have little immediate effect on 
GHG emissions (Patt 2015; Geels et al. 2017). Hence, activities that 
contribute to transformative potential include technology transfer 
and financial support for low-carbon infrastructure, especially where 
the latter is not tied to immediate emissions reductions. Assessing 
the transformative potential of international cooperation takes these 
factors into account. Equity and distributive outcomes are of central 
importance to the climate change debate, and hence for evaluating 
the effects of policies. Equity encompasses the notion of distributive 
justice which refers to the distribution of goods, burdens, costs and 
benefits, as well as procedural-related issues (Kverndokk 2018). 
Finally, the literature on the performance of other MEAs highlights 
the importance of institutional strength, which can include regulative 
quality, mechanisms to enhance transparency and accountability, 
and administrative capacity. Regulative quality includes guidance 
and signalling (Oberthür et al. 2017), as well as clear rules and 
standards to facilitate collective action (Oberthür and Bodle 2016). 
The literature is clear that legally-binding obligations (which 
require the formal expression of state consent) and non-binding 
recommendations can each be appropriate, depending on the 
particular circumstances (Skjærseth et al. 2006), and indeed it has 
been argued that for climate change non-binding recommendations 
may better fit the capacity of global governance organisations (Victor 
2011). Mechanisms to enhance transparency and accountability are 
essential to collect, protect, and analyse relevant data about Parties’ 
implementation of their obligations, and to identify and address 
challenges in implementation (Kramarz and Park 2016; Kinley et al. 
2020). Administrative capacity refers to the strength of the formal 
bodies established to serve the Parties to the regime and help 
ensure compliance and goal attainment (Andler and Behrle 2009; 
Bauer et al. 2017). 
In addition to building on the social science theory just described, 
we recognise that it is also important to strike a  balance 
between applying the same standards developed and applied to 
international cooperation in AR5 and maintaining consistency with 
other chapters of this report (primarily Chapters 1, 4, 13 and 15). 
Table 14.2 presents a set of criteria that do this, and which are then 
applied later in the chapter.14.3 The UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement 
14.3.1 The UN Climate Change Regime
14.3.1.1  Instruments and Milestones
The international climate change regime, in evolution for three 
decades, comprises the 1992 UNFCCC, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, and 
the 2015 Paris Agreement. The UNFCCC is a ‘framework’ convention, 
capturing broad convergence among states on an objective, a set of 
principles, and general obligations relating to mitigation, adaptation, 
reporting and support. The UNFCCC categorises Parties into Annex 
I and Annex II. Annex I Parties, comprising developed country Parties, 
have a goal to return, individually or jointly, their GHG emissions to 

Parties except for those with economies in transition, have additional 
obligations relating to the provision of financial and technology 
support. Parties including developing country Parties, characterised as 
non-Annex-I Parties, have reporting obligations, as well as obligations 
to take policies and measures on mitigation and adaptation. The 
UNFCCC also establishes the institutional building blocks for global 
climate governance. Both the 1997 Kyoto Protocol and the 2015 Paris 
Agreement are distinct but ‘related legal instruments’ in that only 
Parties to the UNFCCC can be Parties to these later instruments.
The Kyoto Protocol specifies GHG emissions reduction targets for 
the 2008–2012 commitment period for countries listed in its Annex 
B (which broadly corresponds to Annex I to the UNFCCC) (UNFCCC 
1997, Art. 3  and Annex B). The Kyoto Protocol entered into force 
in 2005. Shortly thereafter, states began negotiating a  second 
commitment period under the Protocol for Annex B Parties, as well 
as initiating a  process under the UNFCCC to consider long-term 
cooperation among all Parties.
At the 13th Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP13) in 
Bali in 2007, Parties adopted the Bali Action Plan which launched 
negotiations aimed at an agreed outcome enhancing the UNFCCC’s 
‘full, effective and sustained implementation’. The agreed outcome 
was to be adopted at COP15 in Copenhagen in 2009, but negotiations 
failed to deliver a consensus document. The result instead was the 
Copenhagen Accord, which was taken note of by the COP . While 
it was a political agreement with no formal legal status under the 
UNFCCC, it reflected significant progress on several fronts and set 
in place the building blocks for the Paris Agreement, namely: setting Table 14.2 | Criteria for assessing effectiveness of international cooperation.
Criterion Description
Environmental outcomesTo what extent does international cooperation lead to identifiable environmental benefits, namely the reduction of economy-wide and sectoral 
emissions of greenhouse gases from pre-existing levels or ‘business as usual’ scenarios?
Transformative potentialTo what extent does international cooperation contribute to the enabling conditions for transitioning to a zero-carbon economy and sustainable 
development pathways at the global, national, or sectoral levels?
Distributive outcomesTo what extent does international cooperation lead to greater equity with respect to the costs, benefits, and burdens of mitigation actions, taking 
into account current and historical contributions and circumstances? 
Economic performance To what extent does international cooperation promote the achievement of economically efficient and cost-effective mitigation activities?
Institutional strengthTo what extent does international cooperation create the institutional framework needed for the achievement of internationally agreed-upon 
goals, and contribute to national, sub-national, and sectoral institutions needed for decentralised and bottom-up mitigation governance?
on all countries to put forward mitigation pledges; establishing 
broad new terms for the reporting and verification of countries’ 
actions; setting a goal of mobilising USD100 billion a year by 2020 
from a  wide variety of sources, public and private, bilateral and 
multilateral, including alternative sources of finance; and, calling 
for the establishment of a new Green Climate Fund and Technology 
Mechanism (Rajamani 2010; Rogelj et al. 2010; UNFCCC 2010a). One 
hundred and forty states endorsed the Copenhagen Accord, with 85 
countries entering pledges to reduce their emissions or constrain 
their growth by 2020 (Christensen and Olhoff 2019). At COP16 in Cancun in 2010, Parties adopted a set of decisions termed 
the Cancun Agreements that effectively formalised the core elements 
of the Copenhagen Accord, and the pledges states made, under the 
UNFCCC.  The Cancun Agreements were regarded as an interim 
arrangement through to 2020, and Parties left the door open to further 
negotiations, in line with negotiations launched in 2005, toward 
a legally-binding successor to the Kyoto Protocol (Freestone 2010; Liu 
2011a). Collectively the G20 states are on track to meeting the mid 
level of their Cancun pledges, although there is uncertainty about some 
individual pledges. However, there is significant gap between annual 
Table 14.3 | Continuities in and differences between the UNFCCC, Paris Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol.
Feature UNFCCC Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement 
Objective To stabilise GHGs in the atmosphere at a level that would 
prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system, in a timeframe to protect food security, enable natural 
ecosystem adaptability and permit economic development in 
a sustainable mannerPrimarily mitigation-focused 
(although in pursuit of the 
UNFCCC objective) Mitigation in line with a long-term temperature goal, 
adaptation and finance goals, as well as sustainable 
development and equity (also, in pursuit of the 
UNFCCC objective) 
Architecture ‘Framework’ agreement with agreement on principles such 
as ‘common but differentiated responsibilities and respective 
capabilities’), division of countries into Annexes, with different 
groups of countries with differentiated commitments Differentiated targets, based on 
national offers submitted to the 
multilateral negotiation process, 
and multilaterally negotiated 
common metrics Nationally Determined Contributions subject to 
transparency, multilateral consideration of progress, 
common metrics in inventories and accounting 
Coverage of 
mitigation-related 
commitments Annex I Parties with a GHG stabilisation goal, all Parties to 
take policies and measuresUNFCCC Annex I/Kyoto Annex 
B Parties only All Parties 
Targets GHG stabilisation goal for Annex I Parties (‘quasi target’)Legally-binding, differentiated 
mitigation targets inscribed 
in treaty Non-binding (in terms of results) contributions 
incorporated in Parties’ NDCs, and provisions 
including those relating to highest possible ambition, 
progression and ‘common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities’, in light 
of different national circumstances 
Timetable Aim to return to 1990 levels of GHGs by 2000Two commitment periods 
(2008–2012; 2013–2020) Initial NDCs for timeframes from 2020 running 
through to 2025 or 2030 with new or updated NDCs 
every five years, and encouragement to submit long-
term low-GHG emission development strategies 
Adaptation Parties to cooperate in preparing for adaptation to the impacts 
of climate change Parties to formulate and 
implement national adaptation 
measures, share of proceeds 
from CDM to fund adaptation Qualitative global goal on adaptation to enhance 
adaptative capacity and resilience, and reduce 
vulnerability, Parties to undertake national 
adaptation planning and implementation 
Loss and Damage Not covered Not covered Cooperation and facilitation to enhance 
understanding, action and support for loss and 
damage, including through the Warsaw International 
Mechanism on Loss and Damage under the UNFCCC 
Transparency National communications from Parties, with differing 
content and set to differing timeframes for different 
categories of PartiesReporting and review – Annex 
B Parties only Enhanced transparency framework and five-yearly 
global stocktake for a collective assessment of 
progress towards goals – all Parties 
Support Annex II commitments relating to provision of 
finance, development and transfer of technology 
to developing countriesAdvances UNFCCC 
Annex II commitments 
relating to provision 
of finance, development 
and transfer of technology 
to developing countries Enhances reporting in relation to support, expands 
the base of donors, and tailors support to the needs 
and capacities of developing countries 
Implementation National implementation, communication on implementationMarket mechanisms 
(International Emissions Trading, 
Joint Implementation, CDM) Voluntary cooperation on mitigation (through 
market-based and non-market approaches); 
encouragement of REDD+ (guidance and rules 
under negotiation) 
Compliance Multilateral consultative process, never adoptedCompliance committee 
with facilitative and 
enforcement branches; 
sanctions for non-compliance Committee to promote compliance and facilitate 
implementation; no sanctions 
consistent with the 2°C goal (Christensen and Olhoff 2019).
At the 2011 Durban climate conference, Parties launched negotiations 
for ‘a Protocol, another legal instrument or agreed outcome with legal 
force’ with a scheduled end to the negotiations in 2015 (UNFCCC 
2012, Dec. 1, para. 2). At the 2012 Doha climate conference, Parties 
adopted a  second commitment period for the Kyoto Protocol, 
running from 2013–2020. The Doha Amendment entered into force 
on 31 December 2020. Given the subsequent adoption of the Paris 
Agreement, the Kyoto Protocol is unlikely to continue beyond 2020 
(Bodansky et al. 2017a). At the end of the compliance assessment 
period under the Kyoto Protocol, Annex B  Parties were in full 
compliance with their targets for the first commitment period; in 
some cases through the use of the Protocol’s flexibility mechanisms 
(Shishlov et al. 2016). 
Although both the Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement are under 
the UNFCCC, they are generally seen as representing fundamentally 
different approaches to international cooperation on climate change 
(Held and Roger 2018; Falkner 2016b). The Paris Agreement has been 
characterised as a ‘decisive break’ from the Kyoto Protocol (Keohane 
and Oppenheimer 2016). Some note that the mitigation efforts under 
the Kyoto Protocol take the form of targets that, albeit based on 
national self-selection, were part of the multilateral negotiation process, 
whereas under the Paris Agreement Parties make Nationally Determined 
Contributions. The different approaches have been characterised by 
some as a distinction between a ‘top down’ and ‘bottom up’ approach 
(Bodansky and Rajamani 2016; Bodansky et al. 2016; Chan et al. 2016; 
Doelle 2016) but others disagree with such a characterisation, pointing 
to continuities within the regime, for example, in terms of rules for 
reporting and review, and crossover and use of common institutional 
arrangements (Depledge 2017; Allan 2019). Some note, in any case, 
that the Kyoto Protocol’s core obligations are substantive obligations 
of result, while many of the Paris Agreement’s core obligations are 
procedural obligations, complemented by obligations of conduct 
(Rajamani 2016a; Mayer 2018a). 
The differences between and continuities in the three treaties that 
comprise the UN climate regime are summarised in Table  14.3. 
The Kyoto targets apply only to Annex I Parties, but the procedural 
obligations relating to NDCs in the Paris Agreement apply to all 
Parties, with flexibilities in relation to some obligations for Least 
Developed Countries (LDCs), Small Island Developing States (SIDS), 
and developing countries that need them in light of their capacities. 
The Kyoto targets are housed in its Annex B, therefore requiring 
a formal process of amendment for revision, whereas the Paris NDCs 
are located in an online registry that is maintained by the Secretariat, 
but to which Parties can upload their own NDCs. The Kyoto Protocol 
allows Annex B  Parties to use three market-based mechanisms 
– the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), Joint Implementation 
and International Emissions Trading – to fulfil a part of their GHG 
targets. The Paris Agreement recognises that Parties may choose 
to cooperate voluntarily on markets, in the form of cooperative 
approaches under Article 6.2, and a mechanism with international 
oversight under Article 6.4, subject to guidance and rules that are 
yet to be adopted. These rules relate to integrity and accounting  (La  Hoz  Theuer et al. 2019). Article 5  also provides explicit 
endorsement of reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation and fostering conservation (REDD+). The Kyoto Protocol 
contains an extensive reporting and review process, backed by 
a compliance mechanism. This mechanism includes an enforcement 
branch, to ensure compliance, and sanction non-compliance (through 
the withdrawal of benefits such as participation in market-based 
mechanisms), with its national system requirements, and GHG 
targets. By contrast, the Paris Agreement relies on informational 
requirements and flows to enhance the clarity of NDCs, and to track 
progress in the implementation and achievement of NDCs.
14.3.1.2 Negotiating Context and Dynamics
The 2015 Paris Agreement was negotiated in a  starkly different 
geopolitical context to that of the 1992 UNFCCC and the 1997 Kyoto 
Protocol (Streck and Terhalle 2013; Ciplet et al. 2015). The ‘rupturing 
binary balance of superpowers’ of the 1980s had given way to 
a multipolar world with several distinctive trends: emerging economies 
began challenging US dominance (Ciplet et al. 2015); industrialised 
countries’ emissions peaked in the 2010s and started declining, 
while emissions from emerging economies began to grow (Falkner 
2019); the EU stretched eastwards and became increasingly supra-
national (Kinley et al. 2020); disparities within the group of developing 
countries increased (Ciplet et al. 2015); and the role of non-state actors 
in mitigation efforts has grown more salient (Bäckstrand et al. 2017; 
Kuyper et al. 2018b; Falkner 2019). The rise of emerging powers, many 
of whom now have ‘veto power’, however, some noted, did not detract 
from the unequal development and inequality at the heart of global 
environmental politics (Hurrell and Sengupta 2012).
In this altered context, unlike in the 1990s when the main cleavages 
were between the EU and the US (Hurrell and Sengupta 2012), US–
China ‘great power politics’ came to be seen as determinative of 
outcomes in the climate change negotiations (Terhalle and Depledge 
2013). The US–China joint announcement (Whitehouse 2014), 
for instance, before the 2014 Lima climate conference, brokered 
the deal on differentiation that came to be embodied in the Paris 
Agreement (Rajamani 2016a; Ciplet and Roberts 2017). Others have 
identified, on the basis of economic standing, political influence, and 
emissions levels, three influential groups – the first comprising the 
USA with Japan, Canada, and Russia, the second comprising the 
EU and the third comprising China, India and Brazil (Brenton 2013). 
The emergence of the Major Economies Fora, among other climate 
clubs (discussed in Section 14.2.2) reflects this development (Brenton 
2013). It also represents a ‘minilateral’ forum, built on a recognition 
of power asymmetries, in which negotiating compromises are 
politically tested and fed into multilateral processes (Falkner 2016a). 
Beyond these countries, in the decade leading up to the Paris climate 
negotiations, increasing differences within the group of developing 
countries divided the 134-strong developing country alliance of the 
G77/China into several interest-based coalitions (Vihma et al. 2011; 
Bodansky et al. 2017b). A division emerged between the vulnerable 
least developed and small island states on the one side and rapidly 
developing economies, the BASIC (Brazil, South Africa, India and 
China) on the other, as the latter are ‘decidedly not developed but 
in part led to the High Ambition Coalition in Paris between vulnerable 
countries and the more progressive industrialised countries (Ciplet 
and Roberts 2017). A  division also emerged between the BASIC 
countries (Hurrell and Sengupta 2012), that each have distinctive 
identities and positions (Hochstetler and Milkoreit 2013). In the lead 
up to the Paris negotiations, China and India formed the Like-Minded 
Developing Countries with the Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the Bolivarian Alliance for the 
Peoples of our Americas (ALBA) countries, to resist the erosion of 
differentiation in the regime. Yet, the ‘complex and competing’ 
identities of India and China, with differing capacities, challenges 
and self-images, have also influenced the negotiations (Ciplet and 
Roberts 2017; Rajamani 2017). Other developing countries’ coalitions 
also played an important role in striking the final deal in Paris. The 
Alliance of Small Island States, despite their lack of structural power, 
played a leading role, in particular in relation to the inclusion of the 
1.5°C long-term temperature goal in the UN climate regime (Agueda 
Corneloup and Mol 2014; Ourbak and Magnan 2018). The Association 
of the Latin American and Caribbean Countries (AILAC) that emerged 
in 2012 also played a decisive role in fostering ambition (Edwards 
et al. 2017; Watts and Depledge 2018).
Leadership is essential to reaching international agreements and 
overcoming collective action problems (Parker et al. 2015). The Paris 
negotiations were faced, as a reflection of the multipolarity that had 
emerged, with a ‘fragmented leadership landscape’ with the USA, EU, and China being perceived as leaders at different points in time 
and to varying degrees (Karlsson et al. 2012; Parker et al. 2014). Small 
island states are also credited with demonstrating ‘moral leadership’ 
(Agueda Corneloup and Mol 2014), and non-state and sub-national 
actors are beginning to be recognised as pioneers and leaders (Wurzel 
et al. 2019). There is also a burgeoning literature on the emergence of 
diffused leadership and the salience of followers (Parker et al. 2014; 
Busby and Urpelainen 2020).
It is in the context of this complex, multipolar and highly differentiated 
world – with a heterogeneity of interests, constraints and capacities, 
increased contestations over shares of the carbon and development 
space, as well as diffused leadership – that the Paris Agreement was 
negotiated. This context fundamentally influenced the shape of the 
Paris Agreement, in particular on issues relating to its architecture, 
‘legalisation’ (Karlas 2017) and differentiation (Bodansky et al. 
2017b; Kinley et al. 2020), all of which are discussed below.
14.3.2 Elements of the Paris Agreement Relevant 
to Mitigation 
The 2015 Paris Agreement to the UNFCCC, which entered into force 
on 4 November 2016, and has 193 Parties as of March 2022, is at 
the centre of international cooperative efforts for climate change 
mitigation and adaptation in the post-2020 period. Although its legal 
form was heavily disputed, especially in the initial part of its four-year 
Goals: Mitigation (well below 2°C, pursuing 1.5°C), adaptation, and ﬁnance implemented  to 
reﬂect equity and CBDRRC in light of differing national circumstances (Arts 2, 4.1, 7.1)
Loss &
Damage
(Art. 8)Paris Agreement Warsaw
Mechanism
Support Transparency
Mitigation
(Art. 4)Adaptation
(Art. 7)Finance
(Art. 9)Technology
(Art. 10)Capacity-building
(Art. 11)
Implementation and compliance 
(Art. 15)Sinks (Art. 5)
Cooperative mechanisms (Art. 6)NSA
mitigation
measures
Domestic
mitigation
measures Informs
review and
updating of
NDCsInforms
understanding
of support
needsUNFCCC
Global Stocktake every 5 years on basis of science and equity
to assess collective progress towards goals (Art. 14)NDCsAmbitious efforts by all parties towards purpose of Agreement, with progression over time 
and support for developing countries (Art. 3) 
5-yearly, reﬂecting highest possible 
ambition and progression, and long-term 
low-GHG emissions strategies
Figure 14.1 | Key features of the Paris Agreement.  Arrows illustrate the interrelationship between the different features of the Paris Agreement, in particular between 
the Agreement’s goals, required actions through NDCs, support (finance, technology and capacity building), transparency framework and global stocktake process. The figure 
also represents points of interconnection with domestic mitigation measures, whether taken by state Parties or by non-state actors (NSAs). This figure is illustrative rather than 
exhaustive of the features and interconnections.
2016; Bodansky et al. 2017b; Klein et al. 2017), the Paris Agreement 
is a treaty containing provisions of differing levels of ‘bindingness’ 
(Bodansky 2016; Oberthür and Bodle 2016; Rajamani 2016b). The 
legal character of provisions within a treaty, and the extent to which 
particular provisions lend themselves to assessments of compliance 
or non-compliance, depends on factors such as the normative content 
of the provision, the precision of its terms, the language used, and 
the oversight mechanisms in place (Werksman 2010; Bodansky 
2015; Oberthür and Bodle 2016; Rajamani 2016b). Assessed on these 
criteria, the Paris Agreement contains the full spectrum of provisions, 
from hard to soft law (Rajamani 2016b; Pickering et al. 2019) and even 
‘non-law’, provisions that do not have standard-setting or normative 
content but which play a narrative-building and context-setting role 
(Rajamani 2016b). The Paris Agreement, along with the  UNFCCC 
and the Kyoto Protocol, can be interpreted in light of the customary 
international law principle of harm prevention according to which 
states must exercise due diligence in seeking to prevent activities 
within their jurisdiction from causing extraterritorial environmental 
harm (Mayer 2016a; Maljean-Dubois 2019). The key features of the 
Paris Agreement are set out in Box 14.1.
Figure  14.1 illustrates graphically the key features of the Paris 
Agreement. The Paris Agreement is based on a  set of binding 
procedural obligations requiring Parties to ‘prepare, communicate, 
and maintain’ ‘Nationally Determined Contributions’ (NDCs) 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 4.2) every five years (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 4.9). 
These obligations are complemented by: (1) an ‘ambition cycle’ that 
expects Parties, informed by five-yearly global stocktakes (Art. 14), to 
submit successive NDCs representing a progression on their previous 
NDCs (UNFCCC 2015a; Bodansky et al. 2017b), and (2) an ‘enhanced 
transparency framework’ that places extensive informational 
demands on Parties, tailored to capacities, and establishes review 
processes to enable tracking of progress towards achievement of 
NDCs (Oberthür and Bodle 2016). In contrast to the Kyoto Protocol 
with its internationally inscribed targets and timetable for emissions 
reduction for developed countries, the Paris Agreement contains 
Nationally Determined Contributions embedded in an international 
system of transparency and accountability for all countries (Doelle 
2016; Maljean-Dubois and Wemaëre 2016) accompanied by a shared 
global goal, in particular in relation to a temperature limit. 
14.3.2.1  Context and Purpose
The preamble of the Paris Agreement lists several factors that provide 
the interpretative context for the Agreement (Bodansky et al. 2017b; 
Carazo 2017), including a  reference to human rights. The human 
rights implications of climate impacts garnered particular attention 
in the lead up to Paris (Duyck 2015; Mayer 2016b). In particular, the 
Human Rights Council, its special procedures mechanisms, and the 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, through a series 
of resolutions, reports, and activities, advocated a  rights-based 
approach to climate impacts, and sought to integrate this approach in 
the climate change regime. The Paris Agreement’s preambular recital 
on human rights recommends that Parties, ‘when taking action to 
address human rights’, take into account ‘their respective obligations on human rights’ (UNFCCC 2015a, preambular recital 14), a first for 
an environmental treaty (Knox 2016). The ‘respective obligations’ 
referred to in the Paris Agreement could potentially include those 
relating to the right to life (UNGA 1948, Art. 3, 1966, Art. 6), right 
to health (UNGA 1966b, Art. 12), right to development, right to 
an adequate standard of living, including the right to food (UNGA 
1966b, Art. 11), which has been read to include the right to water 
and sanitation (CESCR 2002, 2010), the right to housing (CESCR 
1991), and the right to self-determination, including as applied in the 
context of indigenous peoples (UNGA 1966a,b, Art. 1). In addition, 
climate impacts contribute to displacement and migration (Mayer 
and Crépeau 2016; McAdam 2016), and have disproportionate 
effects on women (Pearse 2017). There are differing views on the 
value and operational impact of the human rights recital in the Paris 
Agreement (Adelman 2018; Boyle 2018; Duyck et al. 2018; Rajamani 
2018; Savaresi 2018; Knox 2019). Notwithstanding proposals from 
some Parties and stakeholders to mainstream and operationalise 
human rights in the climate regime post-Paris (Duyck et al. 2018), and 
references to human rights in COP decisions, the 2018 Paris Rulebook 
contains limited and guarded references to human rights (Duyck 
2019; Rajamani 2019) (Section 14.5.1.2). In addition to the reference 
to human rights, the preamble also notes the importance of ‘ensuring 
the integrity of all ecosystems, including oceans and the protection 
of biodiversity’ which provides opportunities for integrating and 
mainstreaming other environmental protections.
The overall purpose of international cooperation through the Paris 
Agreement is to enhance the implementation of the UNFCCC, 
including its objective of stabilising atmospheric GHG concentrations 
‘at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference 
with the climate system’ (UNFCCC 1992, Art. 2). The Paris Agreement 
aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate 
change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to 
eradicate poverty, by inter alia ‘[h]olding the increase in the global 
average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels 
and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C 
above pre-industrial levels’ (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 2(1)(a)). There is an 
ongoing structured expert dialogue under the UNFCCC in the context 
of the second periodic review of the long-term global goal (the first 
was held between 2013–2015) aimed at enhancing understanding 
of the long-term global goal, pathways to achieving it, and assessing 
the aggregate effect of steps taken by Parties to achieve the goal.
Some authors interpret the Paris Agreement’s temperature goal as 
a single goal with two inseparable elements, the well below 2°C goal 
pressing towards 1.5°C (Rajamani and Werksman 2018), but others 
interpret the goal as a unitary one of 1.5°C with minimal overshoot 
(Mace 2016). Yet others interpret 1.5°C as the limit within the long-
term temperature goal, and that it ‘signals an increase in both the 
margin and likelihood by which warming is to be kept below 2°C’ 
(Schleussner et al. 2016). Although having a long-term goal has clear 
advantages, the literature highlights the issue of credibility, given 
the lengthy timeframe involved (Urpelainen 2011), and stresses 
that future regulators may have incentives to relax current climate 
plans, which could have a  significant effect on the achieved GHG 
stabilisation level (Gerlagh and Michielsen 2015).
increase, are substantial, the purpose of the Paris Agreement extends 
to increasing adaptive capacity and fostering climate resilience 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 2(1)(b)), as well as redirecting investment and 
finance flows (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. (2)(1)(c); Thorgeirsson 2017). 
The finance and adaptation goals are not quantified in the Paris 
Agreement itself but the temperature goal and the pathways they 
generate may, some argue, enable a  quantitative assessment of 
the resources necessary to reach these goals, and the nature of the 
impacts requiring adaptation (Rajamani and Werksman 2018). The 
decision accompanying the Paris Agreement resolves to set a new 
collective quantified finance goal prior to 2025 (not explicitly limited 
to developed countries), with USD100 billion yr–1 as a floor (UNFCCC 
2016a, para. 53; Bodansky et al. 2017b). Article 2  also references 
sustainable development and poverty eradication, and thus implicitly 
underscores the need to integrate the SDGs in the implementation of 
the Paris Agreement (Sindico 2016). 
The Paris Agreement’s purpose is accompanied by an expectation 
that the Agreement ‘will be’ implemented to ‘reflect equity and 
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities (CBDRRC), in the light of different national 
circumstances’ (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 2.2). This provision generates 
an expectation that Parties will implement the agreement to 
reflect CBDRRC, and is not an obligation to do so (Rajamani 
2016a). Further, the inclusion of the term ‘in light of different 
national circumstances’ introduces a  dynamic element into the 
interpretation of the CBDRRC principle. As national circumstances 
evolve, the application of the principle will also evolve (Rajamani 
2016a). This change in the articulation of the CBDRRC principle is 
reflected in the shifts in the nature and extent of differentiation 
in the climate change regime (Maljean-Dubois 2016; Rajamani 
2016a; Voigt and Ferreira 2016a), including through a shift towards 
‘procedurally-oriented differentiation’ for developing countries 
(Huggins and Karim 2016).
Although NDCs are developed by individual state Parties, the Paris 
Agreement requires that these are undertaken by Parties ‘with 
a  view’ to achieving the Agreement’s purpose and collectively 
‘represent a progression over time’ (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 3). The Paris 
Agreement also encourages Parties to align the ambition of their 
NDCs with the temperature goal through the Agreement’s ‘ambition 
cycle’, thus imparting operational relevance to the temperature goal 
(Rajamani and Werksman 2018). 
Article 4.1 contains a  further non-binding requirement that Parties 
‘aim’ to reach global peaking of GHG ‘as soon as possible’ and 
to undertake rapid reductions thereafter to achieve net zero GHG 
emissions ‘in the second half of the century’. Some argue this implies 
a need to reach net zero GHG emissions in the third quarter of the 
21st century (Rogelj et al. 2015; IPCC 2018b) (Chapter 2, Table 2.4 and 
Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 3). To reach net zero CO 2 around 2050, 
in the short-term global net human-caused CO 2 emissions would need 
to fall by about 45% to 60% from 2010 levels by 2030 (IPCC 2018b). 
Achieving the Paris Agreement’s Article 4.1 aim potentially implies that 
global warming will peak and then follow a gradually declining path, 
potentially to below 1.5°C warming (Rogelj et al. 2021). Albeit non-binding, Article 4.1 has acted as a  catalyst for several 
national net-zero GHG targets, as well as net-zero CO 2 and GHG 
targets across local governments, sectors, businesses, and other actors 
(Day et al. 2020). There is a wide variation in the targets that have 
been adopted – in terms of their legal character (policy statement, 
executive order or national legislation), scope (GHGs or CO 2) and 
coverage (sectors or economy-wide). National net-zero targets could 
be reflected in the long-term strategies that states are urged to 
submit under Article 4.19, but only a few states have submitted such 
strategies thus far. The Paris Rulebook, agreed at the Agreement’s first 
meeting of the Parties in 2018, further strengthens the operational 
relevance of the temperature goal by requiring Parties to provide 
information when submitting their NDCs on how these contribute 
towards achieving the objective identified in UNFCCC Article 2, and 
Paris Agreement Articles 2.1 (a) and 4.1 (UNFCCC 2019b, Annex I, 
para. 7). Parties could in this context include information on how their 
short-term actions align with their long-term net zero GHG or CO 2 
targets, thereby enhancing the credibility of their long-term goals.
At last count 131 countries had adopted or had net zero targets 
(whether of carbon or GHG) in the pipeline, covering 72% of global 
emissions. If these targets are fully implemented some estimate 
that this could bring temperature increase down to 2°C–2.4°C by 

to a  temperature increase of 2.9–3.2°C, and NDCs submitted to 
the Paris Agreement which are estimated to lead to a temperature 
increase of 2.4°C–2.9°C (Höhne et al. 2021). 
It is worth noting that Article 4.1 recognises that ‘peaking will take 
longer for developing countries’ and that the balance between 
emissions and removals needs to be on the ‘basis of equity, and 
in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate 
poverty’. This suggests that not all countries are expected to reach 
net zero GHG emissions at the same time, or in the same manner. 
If global cost-effective 1.5°C and 2°C scenarios from integrated 
assessment models are taken, without applying an equity principle, 
the results suggest that domestic net zero GHG and CO 2 emissions 
would be reached a decade earlier than the global average in Brazil 
and the USA and later in India and Indonesia (van Soest et al. 2021). 
By contrast, if equity principles are taken into account countries like 
Canada and the EU would be expected to phase out earlier than 
the cost-optimal scenarios indicate, and countries like China and 
Brazil could phase out emissions later, as well as other countries with 
lower per-capita emissions (van Soest et al. 2021). Some suggest that 
the application of such fairness considerations could bring forward 
the net zero GHG date for big emitting countries by up to 15 to 

2021b). In any case, reaching net zero GHG emissions requires to 
some extent the use of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) methods as 
there are important sources of non-CO 2 GHGs, such as methane and 
nitrous oxide, that cannot be fully eliminated (IPCC 2018b). However, 
there are divergent views on different CDR methods, policy choices 
determine the degree to which and the type of CDR methods that 
are considered and there is a  patchwork of applicable regulatory 
instruments. There are also uncertainties and governance challenges 
associated with CDR methods which render tracking progress against 
net zero GHG emissions challenging (Mace et al. 2021). Researchers 
1.5°C compatible pathways, and the fact that it presents ‘significant 
costs to current and future generations’, it is important to consider 
what an equitable distribution of CDR might look like (UNFCCC 
2019c; Day et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021b).
14.3.2.2 NDCs, Progression and Ambition
Each Party to the Paris Agreement has a  procedural obligation to 
‘prepare, communicate and maintain’ successive NDCs ‘that it intends 
to achieve’. Parties have a further procedural obligation to ‘pursue 
domestic mitigation measures’ (UNFCCC 2015a, Art.  4.2). These 
procedural obligations are coupled with an obligation of conduct to 
make best efforts to achieve the objectives of NDCs (Rajamani 2016a; 
Mayer 2018b). Many states have adopted climate policies and laws, 
discussed in Chapter 13, and captured in databases (LSE 2020).
The framing and content of NDCs is thus largely left up to Parties, 
although certain normative expectations apply. These include 
developed country leadership through these Parties undertaking 
economy-wide absolute emissions reduction targets (UNFCCC 2015a, 
Art. 4.4), as well as ‘progression’ and ‘highest possible ambition’ 
reflecting ‘common but differentiated responsibilities and respective 
capabilities in light of different national circumstances’ (Art. 4.3). 
There is ‘a firm expectation’ that for every five-year cycle a  Party 
puts forward a new or updated NDC that is ‘more ambitious than 
their last’ (Rajamani 2016a). While what represents a Party’s highest 
possible ambition and progression is not prescribed by the Agreement 
or elaborated in the Paris Rulebook (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019), 
these obligations could be read to imply a due diligence standard 
(Voigt and Ferreira 2016b).
In communicating their NDCs every five years (UNFCCC 2015a, 
Art. 4.9), all Parties have an obligation to ‘provide the information 
necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding’ (UNFCCC 
2015a, Art. 4.8). These requirements are further elaborated in 
the Paris Rulebook (Doelle 2019; UNFCCC 2019b). This includes 
requirements –  for Parties’ second and subsequent NDCs –  to 
provide quantifiable information on the reference point, for example 
base year, reference indicators and target relative to the reference 
indicator (UNFCCC 2019b, Annex I, para. 1). It also requires Parties to 
provide information on how they consider their contribution ‘fair and 
ambitious in light of different national circumstances’, and how they 
address the normative expectations of developed country leadership, 
progression and highest possible ambition (UNFCCC 2019b, Annex I, 
para. 6). However, Parties are required to provide the enumerated 
information only ‘as applicable’ to their NDC (UNFCCC 2019b, 
Annex I, para. 7). This allows Parties to determine the informational 
requirements placed on them through their choice of NDC. In respect 
of Parties’ first NDCs or NDCs updated by 2020, such quantifiable 
information ‘may’ be included, ‘as appropriate’, signalling a  softer 
requirement, although Parties are ‘strongly encouraged’ to provide 
this information (UNFCCC 2019b, Annex I, para. 9). 
Parties’ first NDCs submitted to the provisional registry maintained by 
the UNFCCC Secretariat vary in terms of target type, reference year 
or points, timeframes, and scope and coverage of GHGs. A significant number of NDCs include adaptation, and several NDCs have 
conditional components, for instance, being conditional on the use of 
market mechanisms or on the availability of support (UNFCCC 2016b). 
There are wide variations across NDCs. Uncertainties are generated 
through interpretative ambiguities in the assumptions underlying 
NDCs (Rogelj et al. 2017). According to the assessment in this report, 
current policies lead to median global GHG emissions of 63 gigatonnes 
of CO 2 equivalent  (GtCO 2-eq), with a full range of 57–70 by 2030 and 
unconditional and conditional NDCs to 59 (55–65) and 56 (52–61) 
GtCO 2-eq, respectively (Table  4.1). Many omit important mitigation 
sectors, provide little detail on financing implementation, and are not 
effective in meeting assessment and review needs (Pauw et al. 2018). 
Although, it is estimated that the land use sector could contribute as 
much as 20% of the full mitigation potential of all the intended NDC 
targets (Forsell et al. 2016), there are variations in how the land use 
component is included, and the related information provided, leading 
to large uncertainties on whether and how these will contribute to 
the achievement of the NDCs (Forsell et al. 2016; Grassi et al. 2017; 
Obergassel et al. 2017a; Benveniste et al. 2018; Fyson and Jeffery 
2019). All these variations make it challenging to aggregate the efforts 
of countries and compare them to each other (Carraro 2016). Although 
Parties attempted to discipline the variation in NDCs, including whether 
they could be conditional, through elaborating the ‘features’ of NDCs 
in the Rulebook, no agreement was possible on this. Thus, Parties 
continue to enjoy considerable discretion in the formulation of NDCs 
(Rajamani and Bodansky 2019; Weikmans et al. 2020). 
There are several approaches to evaluating NDCs, incorporating 
indicators such as CO 2 emissions, GDP , energy intensity of GDP , 
CO2 per energy unit, CO 2 intensity of fossil fuels, and share of fossil 
fuels in total energy use (Peters et al. 2017). However, some favour 
approaches that use metrics beyond emissions such as infrastructure 
investment, energy demand, or installed power capacity (Iyer et al. 
2017; Jeffery et al. 2018). One approach is to combine the comparison 
of aggregate NDC emissions using Integrated Assessment Model 
scenarios with modelling of NDC scenarios directly, and carbon 
budget analyses (Jeffery et al. 2018). Another approach is to engage 
in a  comprehensive assessment of multiple indicators that reflect 
the different viewpoints of the Parties to the UNFCCC (Aldy et al. 
2017; Höhne et al. 2018). These different approaches are described in 
greater depth in Section 4.2.2.
It is clear, however, that the NDCs communicated by Parties for the 
2020–2030 period are insufficient to achieve the temperature goal 
(den Elzen et al. 2016; Rogelj et al. 2016; Schleussner et al. 2016; 
Robiou du Pont and Meinshausen 2018; UNEP 2018a; Alcaraz et al. 
2019; UNEP 2019, 2020), and the emissions gap is larger than ever 
(Christensen and Olhoff 2019) (Chapter 4). The IPCC Special Report 
on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) notes that pathways that limit 
global warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot show up to 
40–50% reduction of total GHG emissions from 2010 levels by 2030, 
and that current pathways reflected in the NDCs are consistent with 
cost-effective pathways that result in a  global warming of about 
3°C by 2100 (IPCC 2018b Summary for Policymakers D.1.1). Analysis 
by the UNFCCC Secretariat of the second round of those NDCs 
submitted by October 2021 suggests that ‘total global GHG emission 
level, taking into account full implementation of all the latest NDCs 
emissions peaking before 2030’. However, such total global GHG 
emission level in 2030 is still expected to be 15.9% above the 2010 
level. This ‘implies an urgent need for either a significant increase in 
the level of ambition of NDCs between now and 2030 or a significant 
overachievement of the latest NDCs, or a  combination of both.’ 
(UNFCCC 2021a). 
Many NDCs with conditional elements may not be feasible as 
the conditions are not clearly defined and existing promises of 
support are insufficient (Pauw et al. 2020). Moreover, ‘leadership 
by conditional commitments’ (when some states promise to take 
stronger commitments if others do so as well), and the system of 
pledge-and-review, may lead to decreasing rather than deeper 
contributions over time (Helland et al. 2017). Some note, however, 
that many of the NDCs are conservative and may be overachieved, 
that NDCs may be strengthened over time as expected under the 
Paris Agreement, and that there are significant non-state actions 
that have not been adequately captured in the NDCs (Höhne et al. 
2017). Further, if all NDCs with and without conditional elements are 
implemented, net land use, land use change and forestry emissions 
will decrease in 2030 compared to 2010 levels, but large uncertainties 
remain on how Parties estimate, project and account for emissions 
and removals from this sector (Forsell et al. 2016; Fyson and Jeffery 2019). According to the estimates in Table  4.3, communicated 
unconditional commitments imply about a  7% reduction of world 
emissions by 2030, in terms of Kyoto GHGs, compared to a scenario 
where only current policies are in place. If conditional commitments 
are also included, the reduction in world emissions by 2030 would 
be about 12%. 
In this context, it should be noted that many NDCs have been 
formulated with conditional elements, and such NDCs require 
international cooperation on finance, technology and capacity 
building (Kissinger et al. 2019), potentially including through Article 

(UNFCCC 2016b). More broadly, some argue that there is a ‘policy 
inconsistency’ between the facilitative, ‘bottom up’ architecture 
of the Paris Agreement, and both the setting of the long-term 
temperature goal and expectations that it will be delivered (Geden 
2016b). As Figure  14.2 shows, there is a  large share of additional 
effort needed to reach a 1.5°C compatible path by 2030 (and even 
a 2°C compatible path). International coordination and cooperation 
are crucial in enhancing the ambition of current pledges, as countries 
will be more willing to increase their ambition if matched by other 
countries (coordination) and if cost-minimising agreements between 
developed and developing countries, through Article 6  and other 
means, are fully developed (cooperation) (Sælen 2020).0102030
1.5°C from 2020 onwards <2°C from 2020 onwardsGap in emission reductions (domestic action, international coordination and cooperation) (iii)
NDCs with conditional elements (contingent on international cooperation) (ii)
NDCs without conditional elements, or ‘unconditional’ (mainly domestic action) (i)GtCO 2-eq yr–1 by 2030°°
Figure 14.2 | The role of international cooperation in the reductions in annual emissions by 2030 needed to follow a 1.5°C (respectively <2°C) cost-effective 
path from 2020 onwards.  The figure represents the additional contribution of pledges included in the NDCs over current policies at the global level, and the remaining gap 
in emissions reductions needed to move from current policies to pathways that limit warning to 1.5°C (>50%) with no or limited overshoot, and those to limit warming to 
2°C (>67%). Median values are used, showing the confidence interval for the total effort. See Figure 1 in Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 4, and Tables 4.2 and 4.3 for details. 
(i) The grey share represents NDCs with abatement efforts pledged without any conditions (called ‘unconditional’ in the literature). They are based mainly on domestic abatement 
actions, although countries can use international cooperation to meet their targets. (ii) The blue share represents NDCs with conditional components. They require international 
cooperation, for example bilateral agreements under Article 6, financing or monetary and/or technological transfers. (iii) The remaining gap in emissions reductions – the yellow 
share – can potentially be achieved through national and international actions. International coordination of more ambitious efforts promotes global ambition and international 
cooperation provides the cost-saving basis for more ambitious NDCs. 
The Paris Agreement encourages Parties, while submitting their NDCs, 
to explain how these are ‘fair and ambitious’ (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 4.8 
read with UNFCCC 2016a, para. 27). The Rulebook obliges Parties to 
provide information on ‘fairness considerations, including reflecting 
on equity’ as applicable to their NDC (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019; 
UNFCCC 2019b paras. 7a and 9, Annex, paras. 6(a) and (b)). Although 
equity within nations and between communities is also important, 
much of the literature on fairness and equity in the context of NDCs 
focuses on equity between nations.
In the first round of NDCs, most Parties declared their NDCs as fair 
(Robiou du Pont et al. 2017). Their claims, however, were largely 
unsubstantiated or drawn from analysis by in-country experts 
(Winkler et al. 2018). At least some of the indicators Parties 
have identified in their NDCs as justifying the ‘fairness’ of their 
contributions, such as a  ‘small share of global emissions’, ‘cost-
effectiveness’ and assumptions that privilege current emissions 
levels (‘grandfathering’) are not, according to one group of scholars, 
in accordance with principles of international environmental law 
(Rajamani et al. 2021).  Moreover, the NDCs reveal long-standing 
institutional divisions and divergent climate priorities between 
Annex I and non-Annex I Parties, suggesting that equity and fairness 
concerns remain salient (Stephenson et al. 2019). Fairness concerns 
also affect the share of CDR responsibilities for major emitters if they 
delay near-term mitigation action (Fyson et al. 2020).
It is challenging, however, to determine ‘fair shares’, and address 
fairness and equity in a  world of voluntary climate contributions 
(Chan 2016a), in particular, since these contributions are insufficient 
(Section  14.3.2.2.). Self-differentiation in contributions has also 
led to fairness and equity being discussed in terms of individual 
Nationally Determined Contributions rather than between categories 
of countries (Chan 2016a). In the climate change regime, one option 
is for Parties to provide more rigorous information under the Paris 
Agreement to assess fair shares (Winkler et al. 2018), and another 
is for Parties to articulate what equity principles they have adopted 
in determining their NDCs and how they have operationalised 
these principles, and to explain their mitigation targets in terms of 
the portion of the appropriated global carbon budget (Hales and 
Mackey 2018). 
Equity is critical to addressing climate change, including through the 
Paris Agreement (Klinsky et al. 2017), however, since the political 
feasibility of developing equity principles within the climate change 
regime is low, the onus is on mechanisms and actors outside the 
regime to develop these (Lawrence and Reder 2019). Equity and 
fairness concerns are being raised in national and regional courts 
that are increasingly being asked to determine if the climate actions 
pledged by states are adequate in relation to their fair share 
(The Supreme Court of the Netherlands 2019; European Court of 
Human Rights 2020; German Constitutional Court 2021), as it is 
only in relation to such a ‘fair share’ that the adequacy of a state’s 
contribution can be assessed in the context of a  global collective 
action problem (Section 13.5.5). Some domestic courts have stressed 
that as climate change is a  global problem of cumulative impact, all emissions contribute to the problem regardless of their relative 
size and there is a  clear articulation under the UNFCCC and Paris 
Agreement for developed countries to ‘take the lead’ in addressing 
GHG emissions (Preston 2020). Given the limited avenues for 
multilateral determination of fairness, several researchers have 
argued that the onus is on the scientific community to generate 
methods to assess fairness (Herrala and Goel 2016; Lawrence and 
Reder 2019). Peer-to-peer comparisons also potentially create 
pressure for ambitious NDCs (Aldy et al. 2017). 
There are a range of options to assess or introduce fairness. These 
include: adopting differentiation in financing rather than in mitigation 
(Gajevic Sayegh 2017); adopting a carbon budget approach (Hales 
and Mackey 2018; Alcaraz et al. 2019), which may occur through 
the transparency processes (Hales and Mackey 2018); quantifying 
national emissions allocations using different equity approaches, 
including those reconciling finance and emissions rights distributions 
(Robiou du Pont et al. 2017); combining equity concepts in a bottom-
up manner using different sovereign approaches (Robiou du Pont 
and Meinshausen 2018), using data on adopted emissions targets to 
find an ethical framework consistent with the observed distribution 
(Sheriff 2019); adopting common metrics for policy assessment 
(Bretschger 2017); and developing a  template for organising 
metrics on mitigation effort – emissions reductions, implicit prices, 
and costs – for both ex-ante and ex-post review (Aldy et al. 2017). 
The burden of agricultural mitigation can also be distributed using 
different approaches from effort sharing (responsibility, capability, 
need, equal cumulative per-capita emissions) (Richards et al. 2018). 
Further, there are temporal (inter-generational) and spatial (inter-
regional) dimensions to the distribution of the mitigation burden, 
with additional emissions reductions in 2030 improving both inter-
generational and inter-regional equity (Liu et al. 2016). Some of the 
equity approaches rely on ‘grandfathering’ as an allocation principle, 
which some argue has led to ‘cascading biases’ against developing 
countries (Kartha et al. 2018), and is morally ‘perverse’ (Caney 
2011). While no country’s NDC explicitly supports the grandfathering 
approach, many countries describe as ‘fair and ambitious’ NDCs 
that assume grandfathering as the starting point (Robiou du Pont 
et al. 2017). It is worth noting that the existence of multiple metrics 
associated with a range of equity approaches has implications for how 
the ambition and ‘fair’ share of each state is arrived at; some average 
out multiple approaches and indicators (Hof et al. 2012; Meinshausen 
et al. 2015; Robiou du Pont and Meinshausen 2018), others exclude 
indicators and approaches that do not, in their interpretation, accord 
with principles of international environmental law (Rajamani et al. 
2021). One group of scholars has suggested that utilitarianism offers 
an ‘ethically minimal and conceptually parsimonious’ benchmark that 
promotes equity, climate and development (Budolfson et al. 2021).
14.3.2.4  Transparency and Accountability 
Although NDCs reflect a  ‘bottom-up’, self-differentiated approach 
to climate mitigation actions, the Paris Agreement couples this to 
an international transparency framework designed, among other 
things, to track progress in implementing and achieving mitigation 
contributions (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 13). This transparency framework 
builds on the processes that already exist under the UNFCCC. The 
to all Parties, although with flexibilities for developing country 
Parties that need it in light of their capacities (Mayer 2019). Each 
Party is required to submit a  national inventory report, as well as 
‘the information necessary to track progress in implementing and 
achieving’ its NDC (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 13.7) biennially (UNFCCC 
2016a, para. 90). The Paris Rulebook requires all Parties to submit 
their national inventory reports using the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
(UNFCCC 2019b, Annex, para. 20). 
In relation to the provision of information necessary to track progress 
towards implementation and achievement of NDCs, the Paris Rulebook 
allows each Party to choose its own qualitative or quantitative 
indicators (UNFCCC 2019k, Annex, para. 65), a significant concession 
to national sovereignty (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019). The Rulebook 
phases in common reporting requirements for developed and 
developing countries (except LDCs and SIDS) at the latest by 2024 
(UNFCCC 2019k, para. 3), but offers flexibilities in ‘scope, frequency, 
and level of detail of reporting, and in the scope of the review’ for 
those developing countries that need it in light of their capacities 
(UNFCCC 2019k, Annex, para. 5). Some differentiation also remains 
for information on support provided to developing countries (Winkler 
et al. 2017), with developed country Parties required to report such 
information biennially, while others are only ‘encouraged’ to do so 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 9.7). 
The information provided by Parties in biennial transparency 
reports and GHG inventories will undergo technical expert review, 
which must include assistance in identifying capacity-building 
needs for developing country Parties that need it in light of their 
capacities. Each Party is also required to participate in a ‘facilitative, 
multilateral consideration of progress’ of implementation and 
achievement of its NDC. Although the aim of these processes is to 
expose each Party’s actions on mitigation to international review, 
thus establishing a  weak form of accountability for NDCs at the 
international level, the Rulebook circumscribes the reach of these 
processes (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019). The technical expert 
review teams are prohibited in mandatory terms from making 
‘political judgments’ or reviewing the ‘adequacy or appropriateness’ 
of a Party’s NDC, domestic actions, or support provided (UNFCCC 
2019k, Annex, para. 149). This, among other such provisions, has led 
some to argue that the scope and practice of existing transparency 
arrangements reflect rather than mediate ongoing disputes around 
responsibility, differentiation and burden sharing, and thus there 
is limited answerability through transparency (Gupta and van 
Asselt 2019). There are also limits to the extent that the enhanced 
transparency framework will reduce ambiguities and associated 
uncertainties, for instance, in how land use, land-use change 
and forestry (LULUCF) are incorporated into the NDCs (Fyson 
and Jeffery 2019), and lead to increased ambition (Weikmans 
et al. 2020). More broadly, there has been ‘weak’ translation of 
transparency norms into accountability (Ciplet et al. 2018). Hence, 
the Paris Agreement’s effectiveness in ensuring NDCs are achieved 
will depend on additional accountability pathways at the domestic 
level involving political processes and civil society engagement 
(Jacquet and Jamieson 2016; van Asselt 2016; Campbell-Duruflé 
2018a; Karlsson-Vinkhuyzen et al. 2018).14.3.2.5  Global Stocktake
The Paris Agreement’s transparency framework is complemented by 
the global stocktake, which will take place every five years (starting 
in 2023) and assess the collective progress towards achieving the 
Agreement’s purpose and long-term goals (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 14). 
The scope of the global stocktake is comprehensive  – covering 
mitigation, adaptation and means of implementation and support – 
and the process is to be facilitative and consultative. The Paris 
Rulebook outlines the scope of the global stocktake to include social 
and economic consequences and impacts of response measures, 
and loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate 
change (UNFCCC 2019f, paras. 8–10).
The global stocktake is to occur ‘in the light of equity and the 
best available science’. While the focus of the global stocktake is 
on collective and not individual progress towards the goals of the 
Agreement, the inclusion of equity in the global stocktake enables 
a discussion on equitable burden sharing (Rajamani 2016a; Winkler 
2020), and for equity metrics to be factored in (Robiou du Pont and 
Meinshausen 2018). The Paris Rulebook includes consideration of the 
modalities and sources of inputs for the global stocktake (UNFCCC 
2019f, paras. 1, 2, 13, 27, 31, 36h and 37g), which arguably will result 
in equity being factored into the outcome of the stocktake (Winkler 
2020). The Rulebook does not, however, some argue, resolve the 
tension between the collective nature of the assessment that is 
authorised by the stocktake and the individual assessments required 
to determine relative ‘fair share’ (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019; 
Zahar 2019). 
The global stocktake is seen as crucial to encouraging Parties to 
increase the ambition of their NDCs (Huang 2018; Hermwille et al. 
2019; Milkoreit and Haapala 2019) as its outcome ‘shall inform Parties 
in updating and enhancing, in a nationally determined manner, their 
actions and support’ (Art. 14.3) (Rajamani 2016a; Friedrich 2017; 
Zahar 2019). The Rulebook provides for the stocktake to draw on 
a wide variety of inputs sourced from a full range of actors, including 
‘non-Party stakeholders’ (UNFCCC 2019f, para. 37). However, the 
Rulebook specifies that the global stocktake will be ‘a Party-driven 
process’ (UNFCCC 2019f, para. 10), will not have an ‘individual Party 
focus’, and will include only ‘non-policy prescriptive consideration of 
collective progress’ (UNFCCC 2019f, para. 14).
14.3.2.6 Conservation of Sinks and Reservoirs, 
Including Forests
Article 5  of the Paris Agreement calls for Parties to take action to 
conserve and enhance sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases, 
including biomass in terrestrial, coastal, and marine ecosystems, 
and encourages countries to take action to support the REDD+ 
framework under the Convention. The explicit inclusion of land use 
sector activities, including forest conservation, is potentially, while 
cautiously, a ‘game changer’ as it encourages countries to safeguard 
ecosystems for climate mitigation purposes (Grassi et al. 2017). 
Analyses of Parties’ NDCs shows pledged mitigation from land 
use, and forests in particular, provides a  quarter of the emissions 
reductions planned by Parties and, if fully implemented, would result 
Grassi et al. 2017). 
A key action endorsed by Article 5  is REDD+, which refers to 
initiatives established under the UNFCCC for reducing emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, 
sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks in developing countries. It remains an evolving concept 
and some identified weaknesses are being addressed, including 
the issues of scale (project-based vs sub-national jurisdictional 
approach), problems with leakage, reversal, and benefit sharing, as 
well as safeguards against potential impacts on local and indigenous 
communities. Nevertheless, REDD+ shows several innovations 
under the climate regime with regard to international cooperation. 
The legal system for REDD+ manages to reconcile flexibility 
(creating consensus) and legal security. It shows a high standard of 
effectiveness (Dellaux 2017).
Article 5.2 encourages Parties to implement and support the existing 
framework for REDD+, including through ‘results-based payments’, 
that is provision of financial payments for verified avoided or reduced 
forest carbon emissions (Turnhout et al. 2017). The existing REDD+ 
framework set up under decisions of the UNFCCC COP includes 
the Warsaw Framework for REDD+, which specifies modalities for 
measuring, reporting and verifying greenhouse gas emissions and 
removals. This provides an essential tool for linking REDD+ activities 
to results-based finance (Voigt and Ferreira 2015). Appropriate 
finance support for REDD+ is also considered critical to move from 
its inclusion in many countries’ NDCs to implementation on the 
ground (Hein et al. 2018). Since public finance for REDD+ is limited, 
private sector participation is expected by some to leverage REDD+ 
(Streck and Parker 2012; Henderson et al. 2013; Pistorius and Kiff 
2015; Seymour and Busch 2016; Ehara et al. 2019). Article 5.2 also 
encourages Parties’ support for ‘alternative policy approaches’ to 
forest conservation and sustainable management such as ‘joint 
mitigation and adaptation approaches’. It reaffirms the importance 
of incentivising, as appropriate, non-carbon benefits associated 
with such approaches (e.g.,  improvements in the livelihoods of 
forest-dependent communities, facilitating poverty reduction and 
sustainable development). This provision, along with the support for 
non-market mechanisms in Article 6 (discussed below), is seen as an 
avenue for cooperative joint mitigation–adaptation and non-market 
REDD+ activities with co-benefits for biodiversity conservation 
(Gupta and Dube 2018).
14.3.2.7  Cooperative Approaches
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement provides for voluntary cooperative 
approaches. Its potential importance in terms of project-based 
cooperation should be viewed against the background of key lessons 
from the market-based mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol, 
particularly the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). The CDM has 
been used for implementing bilateral strategies and unilateral (non-
market) actions for instance in India (Phillips and Newell 2013), hence 
arguably covering all the mechanisms now included in Article 6 of the 
Paris Agreement. As we describe in Section 14.3.3.1, below, ex post 
evaluation of the Kyoto market mechanisms, in particular the CDM, have been at best mixed. However, Article 6 goes beyond the project-
based approach followed by the CDM, as hinted by the emerging 
landscape of activities based on Article 6 (Greiner et al. 2020), such 
as the bilateral treaty signed under the framework of Article 6  in 
October 2020 by Switzerland and Peru (Section 14.4.4).
This experience from the CDM is relevant to the implementation 
of Article 6  (4) of the Paris Agreement. It addresses a  number of 
specific types of cooperative approaches, including those involving 
the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes (ITMOs) 
towards NDCs, a  ‘mechanism to contribute to mitigation and 
support sustainable development’, and a framework for non-market 
approaches such as many aspects of REDD+. 
Article 6.1 recognises the role that cooperative approaches can play, 
on a  voluntary basis, in implementing Parties’ NDCs ‘in order to 
allow for higher ambition’ in their mitigation actions and to promote 
sustainable development and environmental integrity. Article 6.2 
indicates that ITMOs can originate from a variety of sources, and that 
Parties using ITMOs to achieve their NDCs shall promote sustainable 
development, ensure environmental integrity, ensure transparency, 
including in governance, and apply ‘robust accounting’ in accordance 
with Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties 
to the Paris Agreement (CMA) guidance to prevent double counting. 
While this provision, unlike Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol, does not 
create an international carbon market, it enables Parties to pursue 
this option should they choose to do so, for example, through the 
linking of domestic or regional carbon markets (Marcu 2016; Müller 
and Michaelowa 2019). Article 6.2 could also be implemented in 
other ways, including direct transfers between governments, linkage 
of mitigation policies across two or more Parties, sectoral or activity 
crediting mechanisms, and other forms of cooperation involving 
public or private entities, or both (Howard 2017). 
Assessments of the potential of Article 6.2 generally find that 
ITMOs are likely to result in cost reductions in achieving mitigation 
outcomes, with the potential for such reductions to enhance 
ambition and accelerate Parties’ progression of mitigation pledges 
across NDC cycles (Fujimori et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2016; Mehling 
2019). However, studies applying insights from the CDM highlight 
environmental integrity risks associated with using ITMOs under the 
Paris Agreement given the challenges that the diverse scope, metrics, 
types and timeframes of NDC targets pose for robust accounting 
(Schneider and La Hoz Theuer 2019) and the potential for transfers of 
‘hot air’, as occurred under the Kyoto Protocol (La Hoz Theuer et al. 
2019). These studies collectively affirm that robust governance on 
accounting for ITMOs, and for reporting and review, will be critical 
to ensuring the environmental integrity of NDCs making use of them 
(Mehling 2019; Müller and Michaelowa 2019). 
Article 6.4 concerns the mitigation mechanism, with some similarities 
to the Kyoto Protocol’s CDM. Unlike the CDM, there is no restriction 
on which Parties can host mitigation projects and which Parties can 
use the resulting emissions reductions towards their NDCs (Marcu 
2016). This central mechanism will operate under the authority and 
guidance of the CMA, and is to be supervised by a body designated 
by the CMA (Marcu 2016).
while fostering sustainable development. The decision adopting the 
Paris Agreement specifies experience with Kyoto market mechanisms 
as a  basis for the new mitigation mechanism (UNFCCC 2016a, 
para. 37(f)). Compared with the CDM under the Kyoto Protocol, the 
central mechanism has a more balanced focus on both climate and 
development objectives, and a stronger political mandate to measure 
sustainable development impact and to verify that the impacts are 
‘real, measurable, and long-term’ (Olsen et al. 2018). There are also 
opportunities to integrate human rights into the central mechanism 
(Obergassel et al. 2017b; Calzadilla 2018). It is further subject to 
the requirement that it must deliver ‘an overall mitigation in global 
emissions’, which is framed by the general objectives of Article 6 for 
cooperation to enhance ambition (Kreibich 2018).
Negotiations over rules to operationalise Article 6  have thus far 
proven intractable, failing to deliver both at COP24 in Katowice in 
2018, where the rest of the Paris Rulebook was agreed, and in COP25 
in Madrid in 2019. Ongoing points of negotiation have included: 
whether to permit the carryover and use of Kyoto CDM credits and 
assigned amount units into the Article 6.4 mechanism, whether to 
impose a  mandatory share of proceeds on Article 6.2 mechanism 
to fund adaptation, like for Article 6.4; and whether and how credits 
generated under Article 6.4 should be subject to accounting rules 
under Article 6.2 (Michaelowa et al. 2020a). 
14.3.2.8  Finance Flows 
Finance is the first of three means of support specified under the 
Paris Agreement to accomplish its objectives relating to mitigation 
(and adaptation) (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 14.1). This sub-section 
discusses the provision made in the Paris Agreement for international 
cooperation on finance. Section  14.4.1 below considers broader 
cooperative efforts on public and private finance flows for climate 
mitigation, including by multilateral development banks and through 
instruments such as green bonds.
As highlighted above, the objective of the Paris Agreement includes 
the goal of ‘[m]aking finance flows consistent with a pathway towards 
low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development’ 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 2.1(c)). Alignment of financial flows, and in 
some cases provision of finance, will be critical to the achievement of 
many Parties’ NDCs, particularly those that are framed in conditional 
terms (Zhang and Pan 2016; Kissinger et al. 2019) (Chapter 15). 
International cooperation on climate finance represents ‘a complex 
and fragmented landscape’ with a range of different mechanisms 
and forums involved (Pickering et al. 2017; Roberts and Weikmans 
2017). These include entities set up under the international climate 
change regime, such as the UNFCCC financial mechanism, with the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
as operating entities; special funds, such as the Special Climate 
Change Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund (both managed 
by the GEF), and the Adaptation Fund established under the Kyoto 
Protocol; the Standing Committee on Finance, a constituted body 
which assists the COP in exercising its functions with respect 
to the UNFCCC financial mechanism; and other bodies outside of the international climate change regime, such as the Climate 
Investment Funds administered through multilateral development 
banks (the role of these banks in climate finance is discussed 
further in Section 14.4.1 below). 
Pursuant to decisions adopted at the Paris and Katowice conferences, 
Parties agreed that the operating entities of the financial 
mechanism – GEF and GCF – as well as the Special Climate Change 
Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Adaptation Fund and the 
Standing Committee on Finance, all serve the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC 
2016a, paras. 58 and 63, 2019e,g). The GCF , which became operational 
in 2015, is the largest dedicated international climate change fund 
and plays a key role in channelling financial resources to developing 
countries (Antimiani et al. 2017; Brechin and Espinoza 2017). 
Much of the current literature on climate finance and the Paris 
Agreement focuses on the obligations of developed countries to 
provide climate finance to assist the implementation of mitigation and 
adaptation actions by developing countries. The principal provision on 
finance in the Paris Agreement is the binding obligation on developed 
country Parties to provide financial resources to assist developing 
country Parties (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 9.1). This provision applies to 
both mitigation and adaptation and is in continuation of existing 
developed country Parties’ obligations under the UNFCCC.  This signals 
that the Paris Agreement finance requirements must be interpreted 
in light of the UNFCCC (Yamineva 2016). The novelty introduced by 
the Paris Agreement is a further expansion in the potential pool of 
donor countries as Article 9.2 encourages ‘other Parties’ to provide 
or continue to provide such support on a voluntary basis. However, 
‘as part of the global effort, developed countries should continue 
to take the lead in mobilising climate finance’, with a ‘significant 
role’ for public funds, and an expectation that such mobilisation of 
finance ‘should represent a  progression beyond previous efforts’. 
Beyond this, there are no new recognised promises (Ciplet et al. 
2018). In the Paris Agreement, Parties formalised the continuation of 
the existing collective mobilisation goal to raise USD100 billion yr–1 
through to 2025 in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and 
transparency on implementation. The Paris Agreement decision also 
provided for the CMA by 2025 to set a new collective quantified goal 
from a floor of USD100 billion yr–1, taking into account the needs 
and priorities of developing countries (UNFCCC 2016a, para. 53). This 
new collective goal on finance is not explicitly limited to developed 
countries and could therefore encompass finance flows from 
developing countries’ donors (Bodansky et al. 2017b). Deliberations 
on setting a new collective quantified goal on finance is expected to 
be initiated at COP26 in 2021 (UNFCCC 2019g,e; Zhang 2019).
It is widely recognised that the USD100 billion yr–1 figure is a fraction 
of the broader finance and investment needs of mitigation and 
adaptation embodied in the Paris Agreement (Peake and Ekins 
2017). One estimate, based on a review of 160 Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions ((I)NDCs), suggests the financial demand 
for both mitigation and adaptation needs of developing countries 
could reach USD474 billion yr–1 by 2030 (Zhang and Pan 2016). The 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
reports that climate finance provided and mobilised by developed 
countries was USD79.6 billion in 2019. This finance included 
to developed countries), officially supported export credits and 
mobilised private finance (OECD 2021) (Section 15.3.2 and Box 15.4). 
More broadly, there is recognition of the need for better accounting, 
transparency and reporting rules to allow evaluation of the fulfilment 
of finance pledges and the effectiveness of how funding is used (Xu 
et al. 2016; Roberts et al. 2017; Jachnik et al. 2019; Gupta and van 
Asselt 2019; Roberts et al. 2021). There is also a concern about climate 
finance being new and additional though the Paris Agreement does not 
make an explicit reference to it, nor is there a clear understanding of 
what constitutes new and additional (UNFCCC 2018; Carty et al. 2020; 
Mitchell et al. 2021). Some authors see the ‘enhanced transparency 
framework’ of the Paris Agreement (Section 14.3.2.4), and the specific 
requirements for developed countries to provide, biennially, indicative 
quantitative and qualitative information as well as report on financial 
support and mobilisation efforts (Articles 9.5 and 9.7), as promising 
marked improvements (Weikmans and Roberts 2019), including for 
the fairness of effort-sharing on climate finance provision (Pickering 
et al. 2015). Others offer a more circumspect view of the transformative 
capability of these transparency systems (Ciplet et al. 2018). 
The more limited literature focusing on the specific finance needs of 
developing countries, particularly those expressed in NDCs conditional 
on international climate finance, suggests that once all countries have 
fully costed their NDCs, the demand for (public and private) finance 
to support NDC implementation is likely to be orders of magnitude 
larger than funds available from bilateral and multilateral sources. 
For some sectors, such as forestry and land use, this could leave ‘NDC 
ambitions... in a precarious position, unless more diversified options 
are pursued to reach climate goals’ (Kissinger et al. 2019). In addition, 
there is a  need for fiscal policy reform in developing countries to 
ensure international climate finance flows are not undercut by public 
and private finance supporting unsustainable activities (Kissinger 
et al. 2019). During the 2018 Katowice conference, UNFCCC Parties 
requested the Standing Committee on Finance to prepare, every 
four years, a report on the determination of the needs of developing 
country Parties related to implementing the Convention and the Paris 
Agreement, for consideration by Parties at COP26 (UNFCCC 2019c).
14.3.2.9  Technology Development and Transfer
Technology development and transfer is the second of three ‘means 
of implementation and support’ specified under the Paris Agreement 
to accomplish its objectives relating to mitigation (and adaptation) 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 14.1). This sub-section discusses the provision 
made in the Paris Agreement for international cooperation on 
technology development and transfer. Section 14.4.2 below considers 
broader cooperative efforts on technology development and transfer 
under the UNFCCC.  Both sections complement the discussion in 
Section  16.6 on the role of international cooperation in fostering 
transformative change.
The importance of technology as a  means of implementation for 
climate mitigation obligations under the Paris Agreement is evident 
from Parties’ NDCs. Of the 168 NDCs submitted as of June 2019, 

support for both mitigation and adaptation, and 37 Parties for 
mitigation only (Pauw et al. 2020). Thirty-eight LDCs (79%) and 


While technology is seen as a  key means of implementation and 
support for Paris Agreement commitments, the issue of technology 
development and the transfer of environmentally sound technologies 
for climate mitigation was heavily contested between developed and 
developing countries in the Paris negotiations, and these differences 
are likely to persist as the Paris Agreement is implemented (Oh 2019). 
Contestations continued in negotiations for the Paris Rulebook, 
particularly regarding the meaning of technological innovation, 
which actors should be supported, and how support should be 
provided by the UNFCCC (Oh 2020a). 
Article 10 of the Paris Agreement articulates a shared ‘long-term 
vision on the importance of fully realising technology development 
and transfer in order to improve resilience to climate change 
and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions’ (UNFCCC 2015, Art. 
10.1). All Parties are required ‘to strengthen cooperative action 
on technology development and transfer’ (UNFCCC 2015, Art. 
10.2). In addition, support, including financial support, ‘shall be 
provided’ to developing country Parties for the implementation 
of Article 10, ‘including for strengthening cooperative action on 
technology development and transfer at different stages of the 
technology cycle, with a  view to achieving a  balance between 
support for mitigation and adaptation’ (UNFCCC 2015, Art. 10.6). 
Available information on efforts related to support on technology 
development and transfer for developing country Parties is also one 
of the matters to be taken into account in the global stocktake 
(UNFCCC 2015, Art. 10.6) (Section 14.3.2.5).
The Paris Agreement emphasises that efforts to accelerate, encourage 
and enable innovation are ‘critical for an effective long-term global 
response to climate change and promoting economic growth and 
sustainable development’ and urges that they be supported, as 
appropriate, by the Technology Mechanism and Financial Mechanism 
of the UNFCCC (UNFCCC 2015, Art. 10.5). This support should be 
directed to developing country Parties ‘for collaborative approaches 
to research and development, and facilitating access to technology, 
in particular for early stages of the technology cycle’ (UNFCCC 
2015, Art. 10.5). Inadequate support for research and development, 
particularly in developing countries, has been identified in previous 
studies of technology interventions by international institutions as 
a  key technology innovation gap that might be addressed by the 
Technology Mechanism (de Coninck and Puig 2015).
To support Parties’ cooperative action, the Technology Mechanism, 
established in 2010 under the UNFCCC (Section 14.4.2), will serve the 
Paris Agreement, subject to guidance of a new ‘technology framework’ 
(UNFCCC 2015, Art. 10.4). The latter was strongly advocated by 
the African group in the negotiations for the Paris Agreement (Oh 
2020a), and was adopted in 2018 as part of the Paris Rulebook, with 
implementation entrusted to the component bodies of the Technology 
Mechanism. The guiding principles of the framework are coherence, 
approach and transparency. Its ‘key themes’ include innovation, 
implementation, enabling environment and capacity building, 
collaboration and stakeholder engagement, and support (UNFCCC 
2019e, Annex). A  number of ‘actions and activities’ are elaborated 
for each thematic area. These include: enhancing engagement and 
collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including local communities 
and authorities, national planners, the private sector and civil society 
organisations, in the planning and implementation of Technology 
Mechanism activities; facilitating Parties undertaking, updating and 
implementing technology needs assessments (TNAs) and aligning 
these with NDCs; and enhancing the collaboration of the Technology 
Mechanism with the Financial Mechanism for enhanced support for 
technology development and transfer. As regards TNAs, while some 
developing countries have already used the results of their TNA process 
in NDC development, other countries might benefit from following the 
TNA process, including its stakeholder involvement and multi-criteria 
decision analysis methodology, to strengthen their NDCs (Hofman and 
van der Gaast 2019).
14.3.2.10 Capacity Building
Together with finance, and technology development and transfer, 
capacity building is the third of ‘the means of implementation and 
support’ specified under the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC 2015a, 
Art. 14.1). Capacity building has primarily been implemented through 
partnerships, collaboration and different cooperative activities, inside 
and outside the UNFCCC. This sub-section discusses the provision 
made in the Paris Agreement for international cooperation on capacity 
building. Section 14.4.3 below considers broader cooperative efforts 
on capacity building within the UNFCCC. 
In its annual synthesis report for 2018, the UNFCCC secretariat 
stressed the importance of capacity building for the implementation 
of the Paris Agreement and NDCs, with a focus on measures already 
in place, regional and cooperative activities, and capacity-building 
needs for strengthening NDCs (UNFCCC 2019h). Of the 168 NDCs 
submitted as of June 2019, capacity building was the most frequently 
requested type of support (113 of 136 conditional NDCs) (Pauw 
et al. 2020). The focus of capacity-building activities is on enabling 
developing countries to take effective climate change action, 
given that many developing countries continue to face significant 
capacity challenges, undermining their ability to effectively or fully 
carry out the climate actions they intend to pursue (Dagnet et al. 
2016). Content analysis of NDCs shows that capacity building for 
adaptation is prioritised over mitigation for developing countries, 
with the element of capacity building most indicated in NDCs being 
research and technology (Khan et al. 2020). In addition, developing 
countries’ needs for education, training and awareness raising for 
climate change mitigation and adaptation feature prominently in 
NDCs, particularly those of LDCs (Khan et al. 2020). Differences are 
evident though between capacity-building needs expressed in the 
NDCs of LDCs (noting that Khan et al.s review was limited to NDCs 
in English) compared with those of upper-middle-income developing 
countries as categorised by the World Bank (World Bank 2021); the 
latter have more focus on mitigation with an emphasis on technology 
development and transfer (Khan et al. 2020).The Paris Agreement urges all Parties to cooperate to enhance 
the capacity of developing countries to implement the Agreement 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 11.3), with a particular focus on LDCs and SIDS 
(UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 11.1). Developed country Parties are specifically 
urged to enhance support for capacity-building actions in developing 
country Parties (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 11.3). Article 12 of the Paris 
Agreement addresses cooperative measures to enhance climate 
change education, training, public awareness, public participation 
and public access to information, which can also be seen as elements 
of capacity building (Khan et al. 2020). Under the Paris Rulebook, 
efforts related to the implementation of Article 12 are referred to as 
‘Action for Climate Empowerment’ and Parties are invited to develop 
and implement national strategies on this topic, taking into account 
their national circumstances (UNFCCC 2019i, para. 6). Actions to 
enhance climate change education, training, public awareness, 
public participation, public access to information, and regional and 
international cooperation may also be taken into account by Parties in 
the global stocktake process under Article 14 of the Paris Agreement 
(UNFCCC 2019i, para. 9).
Under the Paris Agreement, capacity-building can take a  range of 
forms, including: facilitating technology development, dissemination 
and deployment; access to climate finance; education, training 
and public awareness; and the transparent, timely and accurate 
communication of information (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 11.1) 
(Section  14.3.2.4). Principles guiding capacity-building support are 
that it should be: country-driven; based on and responsive to national 
needs; fostering country ownership of Parties at multiple levels; 
guided by lessons learned; and an effective, iterative process that is 
participatory, cross-cutting and gender-responsive (UNFCCC 2015a, 
Art. 11.2). Parties undertaking capacity building for developing 
country Parties must ‘regularly communicate on these actions or 
measures’. Developing country Parties have a  soft requirement 
(‘should’) to communicate progress made on implementing capacity-
building plans, policies, actions or measures to implement the Paris 
Agreement (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 11.4). 
Article 11.5 provides that capacity-building activities ‘shall be 
enhanced through appropriate institutional arrangements to support 
the implementation of this Agreement, including the appropriate 
institutional arrangements established under the Convention that 
serve this Agreement’. The COP decision accompanying the Paris 
Agreement established the Paris Committee on Capacity-building, 
with the aim to ‘address gaps and needs, both current and emerging, 
in implementing capacity-building in developing country Parties and 
further enhancing capacity-building efforts, including with regard 
to coherence and coordination in capacity-building activities under 
the Convention’ (UNFCCC 2016a, para. 71). The activities of the 
Committee are discussed further in Section 14.4.3 below. The relevant 
COP decision also established the Capacity-building Initiative for 
Transparency (UNFCCC 2016a, para. 84), which is managed by the 
GEF and designed to support developing country Parties in meeting 
the reporting and transparency requirements under Article 13 of the 
Paris Agreement (Robinson 2018). 
Studies on past capacity-building support for climate mitigation 
offer some lessons for ensuring effectiveness of arrangements 
suggest the need for a  common monitoring system at the global 
level, and evaluation research at the project level, to achieve more 
effective capacity-building support. Khan et al. (2020) articulate 
‘four key pillars’ of a  sustainable capacity-building system for 
implementation of NDCs in developing countries: universities 
in developing countries as institutional hubs; strengthened civil 
society networks and partnerships; long-term programmatic finance 
support; and consideration of a capacity-building mechanism under 
the UNFCCC – paralleling the Technology Mechanism – to marshal, 
coordinate and monitor capacity-building activities and resources.
14.3.2.11  Implementation and Compliance
The Paris Agreement establishes a  mechanism to facilitate 
implementation and promote compliance under Article 15. This mechanism is to operate in a transparent, non-adversarial and 
non-punitive manner (Voigt 2016; Campbell-Duruflé 2018b; Oberthür 
and Northrop 2018) that distinguishes it from the more stringent 
compliance procedures of the Kyoto Protocol’s Enforcement branch. 
The Paris Rulebook elaborated the modalities and procedures for 
the implementation and compliance mechanism, specifying the 
nature and composition of the compliance committee, the situations 
triggering its procedures, and the facilitative measures it can apply, 
which include a  ‘finding of fact’ in limited situations, dialogue, 
assistance and recommendations (UNFCCC 2019e). The compliance 
committee is focused on ensuring compliance with a  core set of 
binding procedural obligations (UNFCCC 2019j, Annex, Para. 22). This 
compliance committee, characterised as ‘one of its kind’ and an ‘an 
important cornerstone’ of the Agreement’s legitimacy, effectiveness 
and longevity (Zihua et al. 2019), is designed to facilitate compliance 
rather than penalise non-compliance.
Box 14.1 | Key Features of the Paris Agreement Relevant to Mitigation
The Paris Agreement’s overall aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable 
development and efforts to eradicate poverty. This aim is explicitly linked to enhancing implementation of the UNFCCC, including its 
objective in Article 2 of stabilising greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that would ‘prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference 
with the climate system’. The Agreement sets three goals:
i. Temperature: holding the global average temperature increase to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts 
to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
ii. Adaptation and climate resilience: increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and foster climate 
resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development, in a manner that does not threaten food production.
iii. Finance: making finance flows consistent with a  pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient 
development.
In order to achieve the long-term temperature goal, Parties aim to reach global peaking of emissions as soon as possible, recognising 
that peaking will take longer for developing countries, and then to undertake rapid reductions in accordance with the best available 
science. This is designed to reach global net zero GHG emissions in the second half of the century, with the emissions reductions effort 
to be determined on the basis of equity and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. In addition, 
implementation of the Agreement as a whole is expected to reflect equity and Parties’ ‘common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities’, in light of different national circumstances.
The core mitigation commitments of Parties under the Paris Agreement centre on preparing, communicating and maintaining 
successive ‘Nationally Determined Contributions’ (NDCs), the contents of which countries determine for themselves. All Parties must 
have NDCs and pursue domestic mitigation measures with the aim of achieving the objectives of their NDCs, but Parties’ NDCs are 
neither subject to a review of adequacy (at an individual level) nor to legally binding obligations of result. The compliance mechanism 
is correspondingly facilitative.
The Paris Agreement establishes a global goal on adaptation, and recognises the importance of averting, minimising and addressing 
loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change. 
The efficacy of the Paris Agreement in achieving its goals is therefore dependent upon at least three additional elements:
i. Ratcheting of NDCs: Parties must submit a new or updated NDC every five years that is in line with the Paris Agreement’s 
expectations of progression over time and the Party’s highest possible ambition, reflecting common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities in light of different national circumstances.
ii. Enhanced transparency framework: Parties’ actions to implement their NDCs are subject to international transparency and 
review requirements, which will generate information that may also be used by domestic constituencies and peers to pressure 
governments to increase the ambition of their NDCs. 
iii. Collective global stocktake: The global stocktake undertaken every five years, starting in 2023, will review the collective 
progress of countries in achieving the Paris Agreement’s goals, in light of equity and best available science. The outcome of the 
global stocktake informs Parties in updating and enhancing their subsequent NDCs. 
These international processes establish an iterative ambition cycle for the preparation, communication, implementation and review 
of NDCs.
For developing countries, the Paris Agreement recognises that increasing mitigation ambition and realising long-term low-emissions 
development pathways can be bolstered by the provision of financial resources, capacity building, and technology development and 
transfer. In continuation of existing obligations under the Convention, developed countries are obliged to provide financial assistance 
to developing countries with respect to mitigation and adaptation. The Paris Agreement also recognises that Parties may choose to 
voluntarily cooperate in the implementation of their NDCs to allow for higher ambition in their mitigation and adaptation actions and 
to promote sustainable development and environmental integrity.
14.3.3 Effectiveness of the Kyoto Protocol  
and the Paris Agreement
14.3.3.1 Ex-post Assessment of the Kyoto Protocol’s Effects
Previous assessment reports have assessed the Kyoto Protocol with 
respect to each of the criteria identified in this chapter. However, at 
the time of AR5, it was premature to assess the impact of Kyoto on 
emissions, as these data had not been entirely compiled yet. Since 
AR5, a  number of studies have done so. Chapter 2 of this report 
lists at least 18 countries that have sustained absolute emissions 
reductions for at least a decade, nearly all of which are countries 
that had Kyoto targets for the first commitment period. Most studies 
have concluded that Kyoto did cause emissions reductions. Such 
studies find a positive, statistically significant impact on emissions 
reductions in Annex I countries (Kim et al. 2020), Annex B countries 
(Grunewald and Martínez-Zarzoso 2012; Kumazawa and Callaghan 
2012; Grunewald and Martínez-Zarzoso 2016; Maamoun 2019), or all 
countries respectively (Aichele and Felbermayr 2013; Iwata and Okada 
2014). Overall, countries with emissions reduction obligations emit on 
average less CO 2 than similar countries without emissions reduction 
obligations – with estimates ranging from 3–50% (Grunewald and 
Martínez-Zarzoso 2012, 2016). Maamoun (2019) estimates that the 
Kyoto Protocol reduced GHG emissions of Annex B countries by 7% 
on average below a  no-Kyoto scenario between 2005 and 2012. 
Aichele and Felbermayr (2013) conclude that Kyoto reduced CO 2 and 
GHG emissions by 10% compared to the counterfactual. By contrast, 
Almer and Winkler (2017) find no evidence for binding emission 
targets under Kyoto inducing significant and lasting emissions 
reductions for any of the Annex B  or non-Annex B  countries. The 
authors identify both negative and positive associations between 
Kyoto and emissions for several countries in several years, but no 
coherent picture emerges. Hartl (2019) calculates a  Kyoto leakage 
share in global CO 2 trade of 4.3% for 2002–2009.In terms of transformative potential, the Kyoto Protocol has been found 
to increase international patent applications for renewable energy 
technologies, especially in the case of solar energy technologies 
and especially in countries with more stringent emissions reduction 
targets, and has even led to an increase in patent applications in 
developing countries not obliged to reduce emissions under Kyoto 
(Miyamoto and Takeuchi 2019). Kyoto also had a  positive and 
statistically significant impact on the cost-effectiveness of renewable 
energy projects, as well as renewable energy capacity development, 
as it stimulated the introduction of domestic renewable energy 
policies (Liu et al. 2019).
The issue of institutional strength of Kyoto has been analysed by many 
authors, and much of this has been assessed in previous assessment 
reports. Since AR5, several papers question the environmental efficacy 
of the Kyoto Protocol based on its institutional design (Rosen 2015; 
Kuriyama and Abe 2018). Particular attention has focused on Kyoto’s 
market mechanisms (Erickson et al. 2014; Kollmuss et al. 2015).
As described in previous IPCC reports and above, the 1997 Kyoto 
Protocol included three international market-based mechanisms. 
These operated among Annex I Parties (i.e., International Emissions 
Trading and Joint Implementation) and between Annex I Parties and 
non-Annex I countries (i.e., the CDM) (Grubb et al. 2014; World Bank 
2018). Joint Implementation led to limited volumes of emissions 
credit transactions, mostly from economies in transition but also 
some Western European countries; International Emissions Trading 
also led only to limited transaction volumes (Shishlov et al. 2016).
Of the Kyoto Protocol’s mechanisms, the CDM market has led to 
a greater amount of activity, with a ‘gold rush’ period between 2005 
and 2012. The main buyers of CDM credits were private companies 
surrendering them within the European Union (EU) Emissions Trading 
System (ETS). Once the EU tightened its rules and restricted the use 
credits in 2012. This price never recovered, as the demand for 
CDM was very weak after 2012, in part because of the difficulties 
encountered in securing the entry into force of the Doha Amendment 
(Michaelowa et al. 2019b). 
Assessing the effectiveness of Kyoto’s market mechanisms is 
challenging, and the results have been mixed (Aichele and Felbermayr 
2013; Iwata and Okada 2014; Kuriyama and Abe 2018). Kuriyama 
and Abe (2018) assessed emissions reduction quantities taking into 
account heightened criteria for additionality. They identified annual 
energy-related emissions reductions of 49 MtCO 2-eq yr–1 flowing 
from the CDM, and non-energy related emissions reductions of 

non-energy related emissions reductions that suggest the latter 
estimate may be of questionable reliability, while also noting that 
regulatory tightening led later CDM projects to perform better with 
respect to the additionality criterion (Michaelowa et al. 2019b). 
The  CDM’s contribution to capacity building in some developing 
countries has been identified as possibly its most important 
achievement (Spalding-Fecher et al. 2012; Gandenberger et al. 2015; 
Murata et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2016; Dong and Holm Olsen 2017; 
Lindberg et al. 2018). There is evidence that the CDM lowered 
compliance costs for Annex 1  countries by at least USD3.6 billion 
(Spalding-Fecher et al. 2012). In host countries, the CDM led to the 
establishment of national approval bodies and the development of 
an ecosystem of consultants and auditors (Michaelowa et al. 2019b). 
On the negative side, there are numerous findings that the CDM, 
especially at first, failed to lead to additional emissions cuts in host 
countries, meaning that the overall effect of CDM projects was to 
raise global emissions. Cames et al. (2016) concluded that over 70% 
of CDM projects led to emissions reductions that were likely less than 
projected, including the absence of additional reductions, while only 
7% of projects led to actual additional emissions reductions that 
had a high likelihood of meeting or exceeding the ex-ante estimates. 
The primary reason the authors gave was associated with the low 
price for CDM credits; this meant that the contribution of the CDM 
to project finance was negligible, suggesting that most CDM projects 
would have been built anyway. A meta-analysis of ex-post studies of 
global carbon markets, which include the CDM, found net combined 
effects on emissions to be negligible (Green 2021). Across the board, 
CDM projects have been criticised for lack of ‘additionality’, problems 
of baseline determination, uneven geographic coverage (Michaelowa 
and Michaelowa 2011a; Cames et al. 2016; Michaelowa et al. 2019b), 
as well as failing to address human rights concerns (Schade and 
Obergassel 2014). 
14.3.3.2 Effectiveness of the Paris Agreement
Given the comparatively recent conclusion of the Paris Agreement, 
evidence is still being gathered to assess its effectiveness in practice, 
in particular, since its long-term effectiveness hinges on states 
communicating more ambitious NDCs in successive cycles over 
time. Assessments of the Paris Agreement on paper are necessarily 
speculative and limited by the lack of credible counterfactuals. 
Despite these limitations, numerous assessments exist of the potential for international cooperation under the Paris Agreement to 
advance climate change mitigation. 
These assessments are mixed and reflect uncertainty over the outcomes 
the Paris Agreement will achieve (Christoff 2016; Clémençon 2016; 
Keohane and Oppenheimer 2016; Young 2016; Dimitrov et al. 2019; 
Raiser et al. 2020). There is a divide between studies that do not expect 
a positive outcome from the Paris Agreement and those that do. The 
former base this assessment on factors such as: a lack of clarity in 
the expression of obligations and objectives; a lack of concrete plans 
collectively to achieve the temperature goal; extensive use of soft 
law (i.e., non-legally binding) provisions; limited incentives to avoid 
free-riding; and the Agreement’s weak enforcement provisions (Allan 
2019), as well as US non-cooperation under the Trump administration 
and the resulting gap in mitigation, finance and governance (Bang 
et al. 2016; Spash 2016; Tulkens 2016; Chai et al. 2017; Lawrence 
and Wong 2017; Thompson 2017; Barrett 2018; Kemp 2018). Studies 
expecting a positive outcome emphasise factors such as: the breadth 
of participation enabled by self-differentiated NDCs; the ‘logic’ of 
domestic climate policies driving greater national ambition; the 
multiplicity of actors engaged by the Paris Agreement’s facilitative 
architecture; the falling cost of low-carbon technologies; provision 
for financial, technology and capacity-building support to developing 
country Parties; possibilities for voluntary cooperation on mitigation 
under Article 6; and the potential for progressive ratcheting up of 
Parties’ pledges over time fostered by transparency of reporting and 
international scrutiny of national justifications of the ‘fairness’ of 
contributions (Caparrós 2016; Chan 2016a; Falkner 2016b; Victor 
2016; Morgan and Northrop 2017; Urpelainen and Van de Graaf 
2018; Hale 2020; Tørstad 2020). Turning to the assessment criteria 
articulated in this chapter, the following preliminary assessments of 
the Paris Agreement can be made. 
In relation to the criterion of environmental effectiveness, the 
Paris Agreement exceeds the Kyoto Protocol in terms of coverage 
of GHGs and participation of states in mitigation actions. In terms 
of coverage of GHGs, the Kyoto Protocol limits its coverage to 
a defined basket of gases identified in its Annex A (carbon dioxide 
(CO 2), methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 2O), hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6), as well 
as nitrogen trifluoride (NF 3)). The Paris Agreement does not specify 
the coverage of gases, thus Parties may cover the full spectrum of 
GHGs in their NDCs as encouraged by the accounting provisions 
in Annex II to Decision  18/CMA.1 (or conversely they may choose 
to exclude important mitigation sectors) and there is also the 
possibility to include other pollutants such as short-lived climate 
forcers like black carbon. Article 4.4 calls on developed countries 
to undertake economy-wide emissions reduction targets with 
the expectation that developing country Parties will also move to 
introduce these over time. Moreover, the Paris Agreement makes 
express reference to Parties taking action to conserve and enhance 
‘sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases’ (Article 5). As under the 
UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol, this allows for coverage of land use, 
land-use change and forestry and agriculture, forestry and other land 
use (AFOLU) emissions, both CO 2 and other Kyoto Annex A gases, 
as well as methane (Pekkarinen 2020). A few countries, particularly 
LDCs, include quantified non-CO 2 emissions reductions from the 
in their economy-wide targets (Richards et al. 2018). Some studies 
find that agricultural development pathways with mitigation co-
benefits can deliver 21–40% of needed mitigation for the ‘well below 
2°C’ limit, thus necessitating ‘transformative technical and policy 
options’ (Wollenberg et al. 2016). Other studies indicate that broader 
‘natural climate solutions, including forests, can provide 37% of the 
cost-effective CO 2 mitigation needed through 2030 for a more than 
66% chance of holding warming to below 2°C’ (Griscom et al. 2017). 
As Figure 14.2 illustrates graphically, communicated unconditional 
NDCs, if achieved, lead to a reduction of about 7% of world emissions 
by 2030 in relation to the Kyoto GHGs, and NDCs with conditional 
elements increase this reduction to about 12% (den Elzen et al. 2016). 
Although there are uncertainties in the extent to which countries will 
meet the conditional elements of their NDCs, the experience with 
the Cancun pledges has been positive, as countries will collectively 
meet their pledges by 2020, and even individual pledges will be met 
in most cases, although arguably helped by the COVID-19 pandemic 
(UNEP 2020). In any case, the main challenge that remains is to close 
the emissions gap, the difference between what has been pledged 
and what needs to be achieved by 2030 to reach a 1.5°C compatible 
path (respectively 2°C) (Roelfsema et al. 2020; UNEP 2020, see 
also Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 4). In terms of participation of 
states in mitigation actions, the Paris Agreement performs better 
than the Kyoto Protocol. The latter contains mitigation targets 
only for developed countries listed in its Annex B, while the Paris 
Agreement extends binding procedural obligations in relation to 
mitigation contributions to all states. It is noted, however, that the 
Paris Agreement represented a weakening of commitments for those 
industrialised countries that were Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, 
although a strengthening for those that were not, and for developing 
countries (Oberthür and Groen 2020). Finally, some analysts have 
suggested that the recent proliferation of national mid-century net-
zero targets – currently 127 countries have considered or adopted 
such targets –  can be attributed, at least in part, to participation 
in the Paris Agreement and having agreed to its Article 4 (Climate 
Action Tracker 2020a; Day et al. 2020).
In relation to the criterion of transformative potential, there is, as 
yet, limited empirical data or theoretical analysis on which to assess 
the Paris Agreement’s transformative potential. The IPCC Special 
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C concluded that pathways 
limiting global warming to 1.5°C would require systems transitions 
that are ‘unprecedented in terms of scale’ (IPCC 2018b). There is 
limited evidence to suggest that this is underway, although there 
are arguments made that Paris has the right structure to achieve this. 
The linking of the UNFCCC financial apparatus, including the GCF , 
to the Paris Agreement, and the provisions on technology support 
and capacity building, provide potential avenues for promoting 
increased investment flows into low-carbon technologies and 
development pathways, as Labordena et al. (2017) show in the case 
of solar energy development in Africa. Similarly, Kern and Rogge 
(2016) argue that the Paris Agreement’s global commitment towards 
complete decarbonisation may play a  critical role in accelerating 
underlying system transitions, by sending a strong signal as to the 
actions needed by national governments and other international support. Victor et al. (2019) argue that international cooperation that 
enhances transformative potential needs to operate at the sectoral 
level, as the barriers to transformation are highly specific to each 
sector; the Paris Agreement’s broad consensus around a clear level of 
ambition sends a strong signal on what is needed in each sector, but 
on its own will do little unless bolstered with sector-specific action 
(Geels et al. 2019). On the less optimistic side, it is noted that the 
extent of the ‘investment signal’ sent by the Agreement to business 
is unclear (Kemp 2018), and it is also unclear to what extent the Paris 
Agreement is fostering investment in break-through technologies. 
United States non-cooperation from 2017 to 2020 posed a significant 
threat to adequate investment flows through the GCF (Chai et al. 
2017; Urpelainen and Van de Graaf 2018). 
In relation to the criterion of distributive outcomes, the Paris 
Agreement performs well in some respects but less well in others, 
and its performance relative to the Kyoto Protocol is arguably lower in 
respect of some indicators such as industrialised country leadership, 
and differentiation in favour of developing countries. While the 
Kyoto Protocol implemented a multilaterally agreed burden-sharing 
arrangement set out in the UNFCCC and reflected in Annex-based 
differentiation in mitigation obligations, the Paris Agreement relies 
on NDCs, accompanied by self-assessments of the fairness of these 
contributions; some of these do not accord with equity principles of 
international environmental law, although it is worth noting that the 
Kyoto Protocol was also not fully consistent with such principles. At 
present, mechanisms in the Paris Agreement for promoting equitable 
burden sharing and evaluating the fairness of Parties’ contributions 
are undefined, although numerous proposals have been developed 
in the literature Herrala and Goel 2016; (Ritchie and Reay 2017; 
Robiou du Pont et al. 2017; Alcaraz et al. 2019; Sheriff 2019) 
(Section  14.3.2.3). Zimm and Nakicenovic (2020) analysed the first 
set of NDCs and concluded that they would result in a decrease in the 
inequality of per capita emissions across countries. In relation to other 
indicators, such as the provision of support, the distributive outcomes 
of the Paris Agreement are dependent on the availability of support 
through mechanisms such as the GCF to meet the mitigation and 
adaptation financing needs of developing countries (Antimiani et al. 
2017; Chan et al. 2018). One study suggests that the implementation 
of the emissions reduction objectives stated in the NDCs implies 
trade-offs with poverty reduction efforts needed to achieve SDGs 
(Campagnolo and Davide 2019), while other studies offer evidence 
that the immediate economic, environmental, and social benefits 
of mitigation in line with developing countries’ NDCs exceed those 
NDCs’ costs, and ultimately align with the SDGs (Antwi-Agyei 
et al. 2018; Vandyck et al. 2018; Caetano et al. 2020) (Chapter 17). 
In relation to the promotion of co-benefits, the Paris Agreement has 
enhanced mechanisms for promoting co-benefits (e.g., in some cases 
for biodiversity conservation through the endorsement of REDD+ 
initiatives and activities) and linkages to sustainable development 
(e.g., through the Article 6.4 mechanism). Finally, in its preambular 
text the Paris Agreement endorses both a human rights perspective 
and the concept of just transitions, creating potential hooks for further 
elaboration and expansion of these principles in mitigation actions.
On the criterion of economic performance, the Paris Agreement’s 
performance is potentially enhanced by the capacity for Parties 
effectiveness. Voluntary cooperation under Article 6  of the Paris 
Agreement could facilitate such linkage of mitigation policies (Chan 
et al. 2018). A  combination of common accounting rules and the 
absence of restrictive criteria and conditions on the use of ITMOs 
could accelerate linkage and increase the latitude of Parties to scale 
up the ambition of their NDCs. However, significant question marks 
remain over how the environmental integrity of traded emissions 
reductions can be ensured (Mehling 2019). The ability of Article 6 to 
contribute to the goal of the Paris Agreement will depend on the 
extent to which the rules ensure environmental integrity and avoid 
double counting, while utilising the full potential of cooperative 
efforts (Michaelowa et al. 2019a; Schneider et al. 2019). 
In relation to the criterion of institutional strength, the Paris 
Agreement’s signalling and guidance function is, however, 
arguably high. The Paris Agreement has the potential to interact 
with complementary approaches to climate governance emerging 
beyond it (Held and Roger 2018). It may also be used by public-
sector organisations –  organised and mobilised in many countries 
and transnationally – as a point of leverage in domestic politics to 
encourage countries to take costly mitigation actions (Keohane and 
Oppenheimer 2016). More broadly, the Paris Agreement’s architecture 
provides flexibility for decentralised forms of governance (Jordan 
et al. 2015; Victor 2016) (Section 14.5). The Agreement has served 
a  catalytic and facilitative role in enabling and facilitating climate 
action from non-state and sub-state actors (Chan et al. 2015; Chan 
et al. 2016; Hale 2016; Bäckstrand et al. 2017; Kuyper et al. 2018b). 
Such action could potentially ‘bridge’ the ambition gap created by 
insufficient NDCs from Parties (Hsu et al. 2019b). The 2018 UNEP 
Emissions Gap Report estimates that if ‘cooperative initiatives are 
scaled up to their fullest potential’, the impact of non-state and sub-
national actors could be up to 1–23 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 by 2030 compared 
to current policy, which could bridge the gap (Lui et al. 2021). 
However, at present such a contribution is limited (Michaelowa and 
Michaelowa 2017; UNEP 2018a). Non-state actors are also playing 
a role in enhancing the ambition of individual NDCs by challenging 
their adequacy in national courts (Chapter 13 and Section 14.5.3).
The Paris Agreement’s institutional strength in terms of ‘rules and 
standards to facilitate collective action’ is disputed given the current 
lack of comparable information in NDCs (Peters et al. 2017; Pauw et al. 
2018; Mayer 2019; Zihua et al. 2019), and the extent to which its 
language, as well as that of the Rulebook, strikes a balance in favour 
of discretion over prescriptiveness (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019). 
Similarly, in terms of ‘mechanisms to enhance  transparency and 
accountability’, although detailed rules relating to transparency 
have been developed under the Paris Rulebook, these rules permit 
Parties considerable self-determination in the extent and manner 
of application (Rajamani and Bodansky 2019), and may not lead 
to further ambition (Weikmans et al. 2020). Further the Paris 
Agreement’s compliance committee is facilitative and designed to 
ensure compliance with the procedural obligations in the Agreement 
rather than with the NDCs themselves, which are not subject 
to obligations of result. The Paris Agreement does, however, seek to 
support the building of transparency-related capacity of developing countries, potentially triggering institutional capacity-building at the 
national, sub-national and sectoral levels (Section 14.3.2.7).
Ultimately, the overall effectiveness of the Paris Agreement depends 
on its ability to lead to ratcheting up of collective climate action 
to meet the long-term global temperature goal (Bang et al. 2016; 
Christoff 2016; Young 2016; Dimitrov et al. 2019; Gupta and van 
Asselt 2019). As noted above, there is some evidence that this is 
already occurring. The design of the Paris Agreement, with ‘nationally 
determined’ contributions at its centre, countenances an initial 
shortfall in collective ambition in relation to the long-term global 
temperature goal on the understanding and expectation that Parties 
will enhance the ambition of their NDCs over time (Article 4). This 
is essential given the current shortfall in ambition. The pathways 
reflecting current NDCs, according to various estimates, imply 
global warming in the range of 3°C by 2100 (UNFCCC 2016b; UNEP 
2018a) (Box  4.3). NDCs will need to be substantially scaled up if 
the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement is to be met (Rogelj 
et al. 2016; Rogelj et al. 2018; Höhne et al. 2017, 2018; UNEP 2020). 
The Paris Agreement’s ‘ambition cycle’ is designed to trigger such 
enhanced ambition over time. Some studies find that like-minded 
climate mitigation clubs can deliver substantial emissions reductions 
(Hovi et al. 2017) and are reasonably stable despite the departure 
of a  major emitter such as the United States (Sprinz et al. 2018); 
other studies find that conditional commitments in the context 
of a  pledge and review mechanism are unlikely to substantially 
increase countries’ contributions to emissions reductions (Helland 
et al. 2017), and hence need to be complemented by the adoption of 
instruments designed differently from the Paris Agreement (Barrett 
and Dannenberg 2016). In any case, high (but not perfect) levels of 
mean compliance rates with the Paris Agreement have to be assumed 
for reaching the ‘well below 2°C’ temperature goal (Sælen 2020; 
Sælen et al. 2020). This is by no means assured.
In conclusion, it remains to be seen whether the Paris Agreement will 
deliver the collective ambition necessary to meet the temperature 
goal. While the Paris Agreement does not contain strong and stringent 
obligations of result for major emitters, backed by a  demanding 
compliance system, it establishes binding procedural obligations, lays 
out a range of normative expectations, and creates mechanisms for 
regular review, stock taking, and revision of NDCs. In combination 
with complementary approaches to climate governance, engagement 
of a wide range of non-state and sub-national actors, and domestic 
enforcement mechanisms, these have the potential to deliver the 
necessary collective ambition and implementation. Whether it will do 
so, remains to be seen.
Impact of Mitigation Policies on Indices of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
Authors: Mustafa Babiker (Sudan/Saudi Arabia), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Christopher Bataille (Canada), Felix Creutzig (Germany), 
Navroz  K.  Dubash (India), Michael Grubb (United Kingdom), Erik Haites (Canada), Ben Hinder (United Kingdom), Janna Hoppe 
(Switzerland), Yong-Gun Kim (Republic of Korea), Gregory F . Nemet (the United States of America/Canada), Anthony Patt (Switzerland), 
Yamina Saheb (France), Raphael Slade (United Kingdom)
This report notes both a growing prevalence of mitigation policies over the past quarter century (Chapter 13), and ‘signs of progress’ 
including various quantified indices of GHG mitigation (Table 2.4). Even though policies implemented and planned to date are clearly 
insufficient for meeting the Paris long-term temperature goals, a natural question is to what extent the observed macro-level changes 
(global, national, sectoral, technological) can be attributed to policy developments. This Assessment Report is the first to address that 
question. This box describes the methods for conducting such ‘attribution analysis’ as well as its key results, focusing on the extent to 
which polices have affected three main types of ‘outcome indices’: 
• GHG emissions: emissions volumes and trends at various levels of governance including sub- and supra-national levels, and 
within and across sectors.
• Proximate emission drivers: trends in the factors that drive emissions, distinguished through decomposition analyses, notably: 
energy/GDP intensity and carbon/energy intensity (for energy-related emissions); indices of land use such as deforestation rates (for 
LULUCF/AFOLU); and more sector-specific component drivers such as the floor area per capita, or passenger kilometres per capita. 
• Technologies: developments in key low-carbon technologies that are likely to have a strong influence on future emissions trends, 
notably levels of new investment and capacity expansions, as well as technology costs, with a focus on those highlighted in 
Figure 2.30.
Policy attribution examines the extent to which emission-relevant outcomes on these indices – charted for countries, sectors and 
technologies, particularly in Chapter 2 and the sectoral chapters – may be reasonably attributed to policies implemented prior to the 
observed changes. Such policies include regulatory instruments such as energy efficiency programmes or technical standards and 
codes, carbon pricing, financial support for low-carbon energy technologies and efficiency, voluntary agreements, and regulation 
of land-use practices. The sectoral chapters give more detail along with some accounts of policy, while trends in mitigation policy 
adoption are summarised in Chapter 13.
In reviewing hundreds of scientific studies cited in this report, the impacts of adopted policies on observed outcomes were assessed. 
The vast majority of these studies examine particular instruments in particular contexts, as covered in the sectoral chapters and 
Chapter 13; only a few have appraised global impacts of policies, directly or plausibly inferred (the most significant are cited in 
Figure 1 in this Cross-Chapter Box). Typically, studies consider ‘mitigation policies’ to be those adopted with either a primary objective 
of reducing GHG emissions or emissions reductions as one among multiple objectives. 
Policies differ in design, scope, and stringency, may change over time as they require amendments or new laws, and often partially 
overlap with other instruments. Overall, the literature indicates that policy mixes are, theoretically and empirically, more effective in 
reducing emissions, stimulating innovation, and inducing behavioural change than stand-alone policy instruments (Sections 5.6 and 
13.7) (Rosenow et al. 2017; Best and Burke 2018; Sethi et al. 2020). Nevertheless, these factors complicate analysis, because they give 
rise to the potential for double counting emissions reductions that have been observed, and which separate studies can attribute to 
different policy instruments. 
Efforts to attribute observed outcomes to a policy or policy mix is also greatly complicated by the influence of many exogenous factors, 
including fossil fuel prices and socio-economic conditions. Likewise, technological progress can result from both exogenous causes, such 
as ‘spillover’ from other sectors, and policy pressure. Further, other policies, such as fossil fuel subsidies as well as trade-related policies, 
can partially counteract the effect of mitigation policies by increasing the demand for energy or carbon-intensive goods and services. 
In some cases, policies aimed at development, energy security, or air quality have climate co-benefits, while others increase emissions.   
Studies have applied a number of methods to identify the actual effects of mitigation policies in the presence of such confounding 
factors. These include statistical attribution methodologies, including experimental and quasi-experimental design, instrumental 
variable approaches, and simple correlational methods. Typically, the relevant mitigation metric is the outcome variable, while 
measures of policies and other factors act as explanatory variables. Other methodologies include aggregations and extrapolations
from micro-level data evaluation, and inference from combining multiple lines of analysis, including expert opinion. Additionally, the 
literature contains reviews, many of them systematic in nature, that assess and aggregate multiple empirical studies. 
With these considerations in mind, multiple lines of evidence, based upon the literature, support a  set of high-level findings, as 
illustrated in Figure 1 in this Cross-Chapter Box, as follows. 
1. GHG Emissions. There is robust evidence with a high level of agreement that mitigation policies have had a discernible impact on 
emissions. Several lines of evidence indicate that mitigation policies have led to avoided global emissions to date of several billion 
tonnes CO 2-eq annually. The figure in this box shows a selection of results giving rise to this estimate. 
As a starting point, one methodologically sophisticated econometric study links global mitigation policies (defined as climate laws 
and executive orders) to emission outcomes; it estimates emission savings of 5.9 GtCO 2 yr–1 in 2016 compared to a no-policy world 
(Eskander and Fankhauser 2020) (Section 13.6.2).
A second line of evidence derives from analyses of the Kyoto Protocol. Countries which took on Kyoto Protocol targets accounted 
for about 24% of global emissions during the first commitment period (2008–12). The most recent robust econometric assessment 
(Maamoun 2019) estimates that these countries cut GHG emissions by about 7% on average over 2005–2012, rising over the period to 
around 12% (1.3 GtCO 2-eq yr–1) relative to a no-Kyoto scenario. This is consistent with estimates of Grunewald and Martinez (2016) of 
about 800 MtCO 2-eq yr–1 averaged to 2009. Developing countries’ emissions reduction projects through the CDM (defined in Article 12 
of the Kyoto Protocol) were certified as growing to over 240 MtCO 2-eq yr–1 by 2012 (UNFCC 2021c). With debates about the full 
 
Policies
Increase in number of mitigation policies implemented worldwide
Technologies GHG emissionsProximate
emission drivers
Increased investments 
in and diffusion of 
low-carbon technologies , 
especially for wind and 
solar energy, electric 
vehicles, energy-efﬁcient 
appliances and 
low-carbon heating.
Decline in costs of 
low-carbon 
technologies, e.g., solar 
PV, battery technology. e.g., RD&D funding, technology
support instrumentse.g., regulation, carbon pricing, 
voluntary agreementse.g., policy mixes including regulation, 
technology support, carbon pricing
Reductions in energy 
intensity globally and in 
all but one world region.
Reductions in carbon 
intensity in Europe, 
Eurasia, the Middle East, 
North America; and 
globally.
Reductions in the rate 
of deforestation in 
several countries, 
especially developing 
countries.Reductions in average annual GHG emissions growth (2.3% in 2000–10; 
1.3% in 2010–18). Sustained emissions reductions in 24 countries, relative 
decoupling in 58 countries by 2015.
Estimates of avoided CO2-eq emissions attributable to policies, compared to no-policy
5.9 Gt yr–1in 2016; 38 GtCO2-eq cumulatively since 1999Eskander and
Fankhauser (2020)
Contextual analyses and comparative indications
4–5 Gt yr–1Cumulative impact of policies on 2019 emissions, from
emission trends reported in Chapter 2, assuming
incremental policy-related avoided emissions of  
0.1 GtCO2-eq, annually from 2010Chapter 1,
Section 1.4.8
3.81 Gt yr–1Projected by Annex I countries for 2020 in their BR4s, 
from 2811 Policies and Measures, impacts reported 
for 38% of themUNFCCC (2020)1.3 Gt yr–1in Annex B country as a result of the Kyoto Protocol 
(or –7% yr–1 on average over 2005–12)Maamoun (2019)
1.8–3 Gt yr–1as the result of various policy instruments with
demonstrable impact. Includes at least 500 MtCO2-eq yr–1
from energy efﬁ ciency programmes; and 1.3 GtCO2-eq yr–1 
from renewables diffusionAggregation of 
multiple sources
Cross-Chapter Box 10, Figure 1 | Policy impacts on key outcome indices. The figure shows the impacts of policies on three indices: proximate 
emission drivers, technologies and GHG emissions, including several lines of evidence on GHG abatement attributable to policies.
extent of ‘additionality’, academic assessments of savings from the CDM have been slightly lower, with particular concerns around 
some non-energy projects (Section 14.3.3.1).
A third line of evidence derives from studies that identify policy-related, absolute reductions from historical levels in particular 
countries and sectors through decomposition analyses (Le Quéré et al. 2019; Lamb et al. 2021), or evaluate the impact of particular 
policies, such as carbon pricing systems. From a wide range of estimates in the literature (Sections 2.8.2.2 and 13.6), many evaluations 
of the EU ETS suggest that it has reduced emissions by around 3% to 9% relative to unregulated firms and/or sectors (Schäfer 2019; 
Colmer et al. 2020), while other factors, both policy (energy efficiency and renewable support) and exogenous trends, played a larger 
role in the overall reductions seen (Haites 2018). 
These findings derived from the peer-reviewed literature are also consistent with two additional sets of analysis. The first set concerns 
trends in emissions, drawing directly from Chapters 2, 6 and 11, showing that global annual emission growth has slowed, as evidenced 
by annual emission increments of 0.55 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 between 2011 and 2019 compared to 1.014 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 in 2000 and 2008. 
This suggests avoided emissions of 4–5 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 (see also Figure 1.1d). The second set concerns emissions reductions projected 
by Annex I governments for 2020 in their fourth biennial reports to the UNFCCC. It is important to note that these are mostly projected 
annual savings from implemented policies (not ex-post evaluations), and there are considerable differences in countries’ estimation 
methodologies. Nevertheless, combining estimates from 38% of the total of 2,811 reported policies and measures yields an overall 
estimate of 3.81 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 emission savings (UNFCCC 2020d). 
2. Proximate emission drivers. With less overt focus on emissions, studies of trends in energy efficiency, carbon intensity, or 
deforestation often point to associated policies. The literature includes an increasing number of studies on demonstrable progress in 
developing countries. For example, South and South-East Asia have seen energy intensity in buildings improving at about 5–6% yr–1 
since 2010 (Figure 2.22). In India alone, innovative programmes in efficient air conditioning, LED lighting, and industrial efficiency are 
reported as saving around 25 Mtoe in 2019–2020, thus leading to avoided emissions of over 150 MtCO 2 yr–1 (Malhotra et al. 2021) 
(Box 16.3). Likewise, reductions in deforestation rates in several South and Central American and Asian countries are at least partly 
attributable to ecosystem payments, land-use regulation, and internal efforts (Section 7.6.2). Finally, the policy-driven displacement of 
fossil fuel combustion by renewables in energy has led to reductions in carbon intensity in several world regions (Chapters 2 and 6). 
3. Technologies. The literature indicates unambiguously that the rapid expansion of low-carbon energy technologies is substantially 
attributable to policy (Sections 6.7.5 and 16.5). Technology-specific adoption incentives have led to a greater use of less carbon-
intensive (e.g., renewable electricity) and less energy-intensive (especially in transport and buildings) technologies. As Chapters 2 and 

attributable to policy. There are no global-level studies estimating the avoided emissions due to renewable energy support policies, 
but there are methods that have been developed to link renewable energy penetration to avoided emissions, such as that of IRENA 
(2021). Using that method, and assuming that 70% of modern renewable energy expansion has been policy induced, yields an 
estimate of avoided emissions of 1.3 GtCO 2-eq yr–1 in 2019. Furthermore, observed cost reductions are the result of policy-driven 
capacity expansion as well as publicly funded resarch and development, in individual countries and globally. These correspond with 
induced effects on number of patents, ‘learning curve’ correlations with deployed capacity, and cost component and related case study 
analyses (Kavlak et al. 2018; Nemet 2019; Popp 2019; Grubb et al. 2021). 
14.4 Supplementary Means and Mechanisms 
of Implementation
As discussed above, the Paris Agreement sets in place a  new 
framework for international climate policy albeit one that is 
embedded in the wider climate regime complex (Coen et al. 2020). 
Whereas international governance had earlier assumed centre stage, 
the Paris Agreement recognises the salience of domestic politics 
in the governance of climate change (Kinley et al. 2020). The new 
architecture also provides more flexibility for recognising the 
benefits of working in diverse forms and groups and allows for more 
decentralised ‘polycentric’ forms of governance (Jordan et al. 2015; Victor 2016). The next two sections address this complementarity 
between the Paris Agreement and other agreements and institutions.
The Paris Agreement identifies a  number of pathways, or means 
of implementation, towards accomplishing rapid mitigation and 
the achieving of its temperature goal: finance; capacity building; 
technology and innovation; and cooperative approaches and markets 
(Sections 14.3.2.7–14.3.2.10 above). In this section, we examine 
each of these means and mechanisms of implementation, and the 
agreements and institutions lying outside of the Paris Agreement 
that contribute to each. In the following section, 14.5, we examine 
the agreements and institutions playing other governance roles: 
organisationMitigation Transparency Sinks Markets Finance TechnologyCapacity 
building
Global treatiesMontreal 
Protocol14.5.1.1 14.5.1.1
CBD 14.5.1.1 14.5.2.1
UNCCD 14.5.2.1 14.5.2.1
Minimata 
Mercury 
Convention14.5.1.1
United Nations 
programmes 
and specialised 
agenciesUN REDD+ 
programme14.5.1.1 14.5.2.1 14.5.2.1 14.4.3
UNEP 14.5.1.1 14.4.3
UNDP 14.4.3
UNIDO 14.4.1.2
UNOSSC 14.4.1.2
FAO 14.5.2.1 14.4.1.2
ICAO 14.5.2.3 14.5.2.3 14.5.2.3
IMO 14.5.2.3 14.5.2.3 14.5.2.3
Other global 
organisationsIEA 14.5.2.2
IRENA 14.5.2.2 14.5.2.2 14.5.2.2
MDBs 14.4.1.2 14.4.1.2 14.5.4 14.4.4 14.4.1.2 14.4.3
Regional, multi- 
and bilateral 
agreementsLRTAP 14.5.1.1
MIGA 14.5.2.2
PPCA 14.5.2.2
Regional trade 
agreements14.5.1.3 14.5.1.3 14.5.1.3
Bilateral 
development 
programmes14.4.4 14.4.1.1 14.4.1.1 14.4.3
International 
science 
programmes14.4.2
South–South 
Cooperation14.5.1.4 14.5.1.4 14.4.3
Non-state trans-
national actorsGlobal city 
networks14.5.5 14.5.5 14.5.5 14.5.5 14.5.5
Environmental 
NGOs14.5.2.2 14.5.4 14.5.3
Social 
movements14.5.3 14.5.3
Business 
partnerships14.5.4 14.5.4 14.5.4 14.5.4 14.5.4
Figure 14.3 | Climate governance beyond the UNFCCC.  The figure shows those relationships, marked in blue, between international governance activities, described in 
the text, that relate to activities of the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement.
regulating activities in particular sectors; linking climate mitigation 
with other activities such as adaptation; and stimulating and 
coordinating the actions of non-state actors at a global scale. 
Figure  14.3 maps out the interlinkages described in the text of 
Sections 14.4 and 14.5. It is an incomplete list, but illustrates 
clearly that across multiple types of governance, there are multiple 
instruments or organisations with activities connected to the 
different governance roles associated with the Paris Agreement and 
the UNFCCC more generally.14.4.1 Finance 
International cooperation on climate finance is underpinned by 
various articles of the UNFCCC including Articles 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7 
and 11.5 (UNFCCC 1992). This was further amplified through the 
commitment by developed countries in the Copenhagen Accord 
and the Cancun Agreements to mobilise jointly through various 
sources USD100 billion yr–1 by 2020 to meet the needs of the 
developing countries (UNFCCC 2010b). This commitment was made 
in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency 
Agreement the binding obligation on developed country Parties to 
provide financial resources to assist developing country Parties 
applies to both mitigation and adaptation (UNFCCC 2015a, Art. 
9.1). In 2019, climate finance provided and mobilised by developed 
countries was in the order of USD79.6 billion, coming from different 
channels including bilateral and multilateral channels, and also 
through mobilisation of the private sector attributable to these 
channels (OECD 2021). A majority (two-thirds) of these flows targeted 
mitigation action exclusively (Chapter 15). These estimates, however, 
have been criticised on various grounds, including that they are an 
overestimate and do not represent climate-specific net assistance 
only; that in grant equivalence terms the order of magnitude is 
lower; and the questionable extent of transparency of information 
on mobilised private finance, as well as the direction of these flows 
(Carty et al. 2020). On balance, such assessments need to be viewed 
in the context of the original commitment, the source of the data 
and the evolving guidance, and modalities and procedures from the 
UNFCCC processes. As mentioned in Chapter 15, the measurement 
of climate finance flows continues to face definitional, coverage and 
reliability issues, despite progress made by various data providers 
and collators (Section 15.3.2).
The multiplicity of actors providing financial support has resulted in 
a fragmented international climate finance architecture as indicated 
in Section 14.3.2.8. It is also seen as a system which allows for speed, 
flexibility and innovation (Pickering et al. 2017). However, the system 
is not yet delivering adequate flows given the needs of developing 
countries (Section 14.3.2.8). An early indication of these self-assessed 
needs is provided in the conditional NDCs. Of the 136 conditional 
NDCs submitted by June 2019, 110 have components or additional 
actions conditioned on financing support for mitigation and 79 
have components or additional actions for support for adaptation 
(Pauw et al. 2020). While the Paris Agreement did not explicitly 
countenance conditionality for actions in developing countries, it is 
generally understood that the ambition and effectiveness of climate 
ambition in these countries is dependent on financial support (Voigt 
and Ferreira 2016b). 
14.4.1.1 Bilateral Finance
The Paris Agreement and the imperative for sustainable development 
reinforce the need to forge strong linkages between climate and 
development (Fay et al. 2015). This in turn has highlighted the urgent 
need for greater attention to the relationship between development 
assistance and finance, and climate change (Steele 2015). 
The UNFCCC website cites some 20 bilateral development agencies 
providing support to climate change programmes in developing 
countries (UNFCCC 2020a). These agencies provide a  mix of 
development cooperation, policy advice and support and financing 
for climate change projects. Since the year 2000, the OECD 
Development Assistance Committee has been tracking trends in 
climate-related development finance and assistance. The amount of 
bilateral development finance with climate relevance has increased 
substantially since 2000 (OECD 2019a). For 2019, it was reported 
to be USD28.8 billion in direct finance and USD2.6 billion through export credit agencies. Further, another USD34.1 billion of the climate 
finance provided through multilateral channels is attributable to the 
developed countries (OECD 2021). The OECD methodology has been 
critiqued as it uses Rio markers, the limitations of which could lead 
to erroneous reporting and assessment of finance provided as well 
as of the mitigation outcome (Michaelowa and Michaelowa 2011b; 
Weikmans and Roberts 2019). This issue is to be addressed through 
the modalities, procedures and guidance under the Enhanced 
Transparency Framework of the Paris Agreement (Section 14.3.2.4), 
through the mandate to the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and 
Technological Advice (SBSTA) to develop common tabular formats for 
the reporting of information on, inter alia, financial support provided, 
mobilised and received (UNFCCC 2019k). Until then, the Biennial 
Assessment Report prepared by the Standing Committee on Finance 
provides the best available information on financial support.
14.4.1.2 Multilateral Finance
Multilateral development banks (MDBs) comprise six global 
development banks: the European Investment Bank, International 
Fund for Agricultural Development, International Investment Bank, 
New Development Bank, OPEC Fund for International Development, 
and the World Bank Group; six regional development banks: 
the African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development, Inter-American Development Bank, and the Islamic 
Development Bank; and 13 sub-regional development banks: the Arab 
Bank for Economic Development in Africa, Arab Fund for Economic 
and Social Development, Black Sea Trade and Development Bank, 
Caribbean Development Bank, Central American Bank for Economic 
Integration, Development Bank of the Central African States, 
Development Bank of Latin America, East African Development 
Bank, Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank, 
Economic Cooperation Organization Trade and Development Bank, 
Economic Community of West African States Bank for Investment 
and Development, Eurasian Development Bank, and the West African 
Development Bank. Together they play a  key role in international 
cooperation at the global, regional and sub-regional levels because 
of their growing mandates and proximity to policymakers (Engen and 
Prizzon 2018). For many, climate change is a growing priority and for 
some, because of the needs of the regions or sub-regions in which 
they operate, climate change is embedded in many of their operations. 
In 2015, 20 representative MDBs and members of the International 
Development Finance Club unveiled five voluntary principles to 
mainstream climate action in their investments: commitment 
to  climate strategies, managing climate risks, promoting climate 
smart objectives, improving climate performance and accounting 
for their own actions (World Bank 2015a; Institute for Climate 
Economics 2017). The members subscribing to these principles had 
grown to 44 as of January 2020. Arguably, it is only through closer 
linkages between climate and development that significant inroads 
can be made in addressing climate change. MDBs can play a major 
role through the totality of their portfolios (Larsen et al. 2018). 
The MDBs as a  cohort have been collaborating and coordinating 
in reporting on climate financing following a  commitment made 
de Janeiro (Inter-American Development Bank 2012). This has 
engendered other forms of collaboration among the MDBs, including, 
commitments to: collectively total at least USD65 billion annually by 

income economies; to mobilise a further USD40 billion annually by 

provision of technical assistance, use of guarantees, and other de-
risking instruments; to help clients deliver on the goals of the Paris 
Agreement; to build a  transparency framework on the impact of 
MDBs’ activities; and to enable clients to move away from fossil 
fuels (Asian Development Bank 2019). While the share of MDBs in 
direct climate financing is small, their role in influencing national 
development banks and local financial institutions, and leveraging 
and crowding in private investments in financing sustainable 
infrastructure, is widely recognised (NCE 2016). However, with this 
recognition there is also an exhortation to do more to align with the 
goals of the Paris Agreement, including a comprehensive examination 
of their portfolios beyond investments that directly support climate 
action to also enabling the long-term net zero GHG emissions 
trajectory (Larsen et al. 2018; Cochran and Pauthier 2019). Further, 
a recent assessment has shown that MDBs perform relatively better 
in mobilising other public finance than private co-financing (Thwaites 
2020). In addition, the banks have launched or are members of 
significant initiatives such as the Climate and Clean Air Coalition to 
reduce emissions of shortlived climate pollutants, the Carbon Pricing 
Leadership Coalition, the Coalition for Climate Resilient Investment 
and the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action. These help 
to spur action at different levels, from economic analysis to carbon 
financing, and convenors of finance and development ministers for 
climate action, with leadership of many of these initiatives led by the 
World Bank.
The multilateral climate funds also have a role in the international 
climate finance architecture. This includes, as mentioned in 
Section  14.3.2.8, those established under the UNFCCC’s financial 
mechanism, its operating entities, the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF), which also manages two special funds, the Special Climate 
Change Fund and the Least Developed Countries Fund; and the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF), also an operating entity of the financial 
mechanism which in 2015, was given a  special role in supporting 
the Paris Agreement. The GCF aims to provide funding at scale, 
balanced between mitigation and adaptation, using various financial 
instruments including grants, loans, equity, guarantees or others 
to activities that are aligned with the priorities of the countries 
compatible with the principle of country ownership (GCF 2011). 
The GCF faces many challenges. While some see the GCF as an 
opportunity to transform and rationalise what is now a complex and 
fragmented climate finance architecture with insufficient resources 
and overlapping remits (Nakhooda et al. 2014), others see it as an 
opportunity to address the frequent tensions which arise between 
mitigation-focused transformation and national priorities of countries. 
This tension is at the heart of the principle of country ownership and 
the need for transformational change (Winkler and Dubash 2016). 
Leveraging private funds and investments by the public sector and 
taking risks to unlock climate action are also expressed strategic 
aims of the GCF . The UN system is also supporting climate action through much-
needed technical assistance and capacity building, which is 
complementary to the financial flows insofar as it enables countries 
with relevant tools and methodologies to assess their needs, 
develop national climate finance roadmaps, establish relevant 
institutional mechanisms to receive support and track it, enhance 
readiness to access financing, and include climate action across 
relevant national financial planning and budgeting processes (UN 
2017a). The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is the 
largest implementer of climate action among the UN Agencies, with 
others, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), United Nations Industrial 
Development Organisation (UNIDO), and United Nations Office for 
South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC), providing relevant support.
The current architecture of climate finance is one that is primarily 
based on north-south, developed-developing country dichotomies. 
The Paris Agreement, however, has clearly recognised the role of 
climate finance flows across developing countries, thereby enhancing 
the scope of international cooperation (Voigt and Ferreira 2016b). 
Estimates of such flows, though, are not readily available. According 
to one estimate in 2020 the flows among non-OECD countries were 
of the order of USD29 billion (CPI 2021).
14.4.1.3 Private Sector Financing
There is a growing recognition of the importance of mobilising private 
sector financing including for climate action (World Bank 2015b; 
Michaelowa et al. 2020b). An early example of the mobilisation of 
the private sector in a  cooperative mode for mitigation outcomes 
is evidenced from the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto 
Protocol and the linking with the European Union’s Emissions 
Trading System, both triggered by relevant provisions in the Kyoto 
Protocol (Section 14.4.4) and lessons learned from this are relevant 
for development of market mechanisms in the post Paris Agreement 
period (Michaelowa et al. 2019b). In 2019 and 2020, on average for 
the two years, public and private climate financing was on the order 
of USD632 billion, of which USD310 billion originated from the private 
sector. However, as much as 76% of the (overall) finance stayed in 
the country of origin. This trends holds true also for private finance 
(CPI 2021). Figure 14.4 depicts the international climate finance flows 
totalling USD161 billion reported in 2020, about 19% of which were 
private flows. For (international) mitigation financing flows of USD116 
billion, the share provided by private sources was 24%. 
Foreign direct investments and their greening are seen as a channel 
for increasing cooperation. An assessment of the greenfield foreign 
direct investment in different sectors shows the growing share of 
renewable energy at USD92.2 billion (12% of the volume and 38% 
of the number of projects) (FDI Intelligence 2020). Coal, oil and gas 
sectors maintain the top spot for capital investments globally. Over 
the last decade there is growing issuance of green bonds with non-
financial private sector issuance gaining ground (Almeida 2020). 
While it is questionable if green bonds have a significant impact on 
shifting capital from non-sustainable to sustainable investments, 
they do incentivise the issuing organisations to enhance their green 
ambition and have led to an appreciation within capital markets of 
(Maltais and Nykvist 2020). In parallel, institutional investors 
including pension funds are seeking investments that align with the 
Paris Agreement (IIGCC 2020). However, the readiness of institutional 
investors to make this transition is arguable (OECD 2019b; Ameli et al. 
2020). This evidence suggests that international private financing 
could play an important role but this potential is yet to be realised 
(Chapter 15).
14.4.2 Science, Technology and Innovation
Science, technology and innovation are essential for the design of 
effective measures to address climate change and, more generally, for 
economic and social development (de Coninck and Sagar 2015a). The 
OECD finds that single countries alone often cannot provide effective 
solutions to today’s global challenges, as these cross national borders 
and affect different actors (OECD 2012). Madani (2020) shows how 
conflict, including international sanctions, can reduce science and 
innovation capacity, which is not evenly distributed, particularly 
across the developed and the developing world. For this reason, 
many countries have introduced strategies and policies to enhance 
international cooperation in science and technology (Chen et al. 
2019). Partnerships and international cooperation can play a role in 
establishing domestic innovation systems, which enable more effective 
science and technology innovation (de Coninck and Sagar 2015b,a). International cooperation in science and technology occurs across 
different levels, with a growing number of international cooperation 
initiatives aimed at research and collaborative action in technology 
development. Weart (2012) finds that such global efforts are effective 
in advancing climate change science due to the international nature of 
the challenge. Global research programmes and institutions have also 
provided the scientific basis for major international environmental 
treaties. For example, the Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution 
Convention and the Montreal Protocol were both informed by scientific 
assessments based on collaboration and cooperation of scientists 
across several geographies (Andresen et al. 2000). Furthermore, 
the Global Energy Assessment (GEA) provided the scientific basis 
and evidence for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
in particular SDG 7  to ensure access to affordable, reliable and 
sustainable modern energy for all (GEA 2012). The GEA drew on 
the expertise of scientists from over 60 countries and institutions. 
Several other platforms exist to provide scientists and policymakers 
an opportunity for joint research and knowledge sharing, such as The 
World in 2050, an initiative that brings together scientists from some 

and Paris Agreement implementation (TWI2050 2018). 
Non-state actors are also increasingly collaborating internationally. 
Such collaborations, referred to as international cooperative 
initiatives (ICIs), bring together multi-stakeholder groups across 
industry, communities, and regions, and operate both within Adaptation and multiple
objectives: USD45 billionMitigation:
USD116 billion
23% Bilateral development
ﬁnancial institutions
25% Government & agencies
40% Multilateral development
ﬁnancial institutions 3% Multilateral funds
2% Public funds
2% State-owned entitites
4% Corporations
2% Institutional investors10% Bilateral development
ﬁnancial institutions
42% Multilateral development
ﬁnancial institutions 1% Export credit agencies
3% Government & agencies
2% Multilateral funds
2% State-owned entitites
1% State-owned
ﬁnancial institutions
12% Commercial
ﬁnancial institutions7% National development
ﬁnancial institutions
10% Corporations
2% Funds
1% Institutional investorsPublic: 81%
USD130 billion
Mitigation: 73%
USD116 billionAdaptation
and multiple
objectives: 27%
USD45 billionPrivate: 19%
USD31 billion
Mitigation:
67%
Adaptation and
multiple objectives: 33%
Public: 76%
Private: 24%Public: 94%
Private: 6%Mitigation:
92%
Adaptation and
multiple objectives: 8%USD161
billion
USD161
billion(a) (c) 
(b) 
Figure 14.4 | International finance flows.  Total international climate financial flows for 2020 were USD161 billion. By comparison, public sector bilateral and multilateral 
finance in 2017 for fossil fuel development, including gas pipelines, was roughly USD4 billion. Part (a) disaggregates total financial flows according to public and private sources, 
and indicates the breakdown between mitigation on the one hand, and adaptation and multiple objectives on the other, within each source. Part (b) disaggregates total financial 
flows according to intended purpose, namely mitigation or adaptation and multiple objectives, and disaggregates each type according to source. Part (c) provides additional 
detail on the relative contributions of different public and private sources. Sources: data from CPI 2021; OECD 2021.
initiatives could make a  major contribution to global emissions 
reduction, Bakhtiari (2018) finds that the impact on greenhouse gas 
reduction of these initiatives is hindered due to a lack of coordination 
between ICIs, overlap with other activities conducted by the UNFCCC 
and governments, and a  lack of monitoring systems to measure 
impact. Increasing the exchange of information between ICIs, 
enhancing monitoring systems, and increasing collaborative research 
in science and technology would help address these issues (Boekholt 
et al. 2009; Bakhtiari 2018).
At the level of research institutes, there has been a major shift to 
a more structured and global type of cooperation in research; Wagner 
et al. (2017) found significant increases in both the proportion of 
papers written by author teams from multiple countries and in 
the number of countries participating in such collaboration, over the 
time period 1990–2013. Although only a portion of these scientific 
papers address the issue of climate change specifically, this growth 
of scientific collaboration across borders provides a comprehensive 
view of the conducive environment in which climate science 
collaboration has grown. 
However, there are areas in which international cooperation can 
be strengthened. Both the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development call for more creative forms of 
international cooperation in science that help bridge the science 
and policy interface, and provide learning processes and places to 
deliberate on possible policy pathways across disciplines on a more 
sustainable and long-lasting basis. Scientific assessments, such as the 
IPCC and Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) offer this possibility, but processes 
need to be enriched for this to happen more effectively (Kowarsch 
et al. 2016). 
A particular locus for international cooperation on technology 
development and innovation is found within institutions and 
mechanisms of the UN climate regime. The UNFCCC, in Article 4.1(c), 
calls on ‘all Parties’ to ‘promote and cooperate in the development, 
application and diffusion, including transfer, of technologies, 
practices and processes that control, reduce or prevent anthropogenic 
emissions of greenhouse gases’ and places responsibility on 
developed country Parties to ‘take all practicable steps to promote, 
facilitate and finance, as appropriate, the transfer of, or access to 
environmentally sound technologies and know-how to other Parties, 
particularly developing country Parties, to enable them to implement 
the provisions of the Convention’ (UNFCCC 1992, Art. 4.5). The issue 
of technology development and transfer has continued to receive 
much attention in the international climate policy domain since its 
initial inclusion in the UNFCCC in 1992 – albeit often overshadowed 
by dominant discourses around market-based mechanisms – and its 
role in reducing GHG emissions and adapting to the consequences of 
climate change ‘is seen as becoming ever more critical’ (de Coninck 
and Sagar 2015a). Milestones in the development of international 
cooperation on climate technologies under the UNFCCC have 
included: (i) the development of a  technology transfer framework 
and establishment of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) 
under the SBSTA in 2001; (ii) recommendations for enhancing the technology transfer framework put forward at the Bali COP in 2007 
and creation of the Poznan strategic programme on technology 
transfer under the GEF; and (iii) the establishment of the Technology 
Mechanism by the COP in 2010 as part of the Cancun Agreements 
(UNFCCC 2010b). The Technology Mechanism is presently the 
principal avenue within the UNFCCC for facilitating cooperation on 
the development and transfer of climate technologies to developing 
countries (UNFCCC 2015b). As discussed in Section 14.3.2.9 above, 
the Paris Agreement tasks the Technology Mechanism also to serve 
the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC 2015b, Art. 10.3). 
The Technology Mechanism consists of the Technology Executive 
Committee (TEC) (replacing the EGTT), as its policy arm, and the Climate 
Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), as its implementation arm 
(UNFCCC 2015b). The TEC focuses on identifying and recommending 
policies that can support countries in enhancing and accelerating 
the development and transfer of climate technologies (UNFCCC 
2020b). The CTCN facilitates the transfer of technologies through 
three core services: (i) providing technical assistance at the request 
of developing countries; (ii) creating access to information and 
knowledge on climate technologies; and (iii) fostering collaboration 
and capacity building (CTCN 2020a). The CTCN ‘network’ consists 
of a diverse set of climate technology stakeholders from academic, 
finance, non-government, private sector, public sector, and research 
entities, together with more than 150 National Designated Entities, 
which serve as CTCN national focal points. Through its network, the 
CTCN seeks to mobilise policy and technical expertise to deliver 
technology solutions, capacity-building and implementation advice 
to developing countries (CTCN 2020b). At the Katowice UNFCCC 
Conference of the Parties in 2018, the TEC and CTCN were requested 
to incorporate the technology framework developed pursuant to 
Article 10 of the Paris Agreement into their respective workplans and 
programmes of work (UNFCCC 2019f). 
The Joint Annual Report of the TEC and CTCN for 2019 indicated that, 
as of July 2019, the CTCN had engaged with 93 developing country 
Parties regarding a  total of 273 requests for technical assistance, 
including 11 multi-country requests. Nearly three-quarters (72.9%) of 
requests received by the CTCN had a mitigation component, with two-
thirds of those mitigation requests related to either renewable energy 
or energy efficiency. Requests for decision-making or information tools 
are received most frequently (28% of requests), followed by requests 
for technology feasibility studies (20%) and technology identification 
and prioritisation (18%) (TEC and CTCN 2019). 
The CTCN is presently funded from ‘various sources, ranging from the 
[UNFCCC] Financial Mechanism to philanthropic and private sector 
sources, as well as by financial and in-kind contributions from the 
co-hosts of the CTCN and from participants in the Network’ (TEC and 
CTCN 2019, para. 97). Oh (2020b) describes the institution as ‘mainly 
financially dependent on bilateral donations from developed countries 
and multilateral support’. Nevertheless, inadequate funding of the 
CTCN poses a problem for its effectiveness and capacity to contribute 
to implementation of the Paris Agreement. A  2017 independent 
review of the CTCN identified ‘limited availability of funding’ as a key 
constraint on its ability to deliver services at the expected level and 
recommended that ‘[b]etter predictability and security over financial 
respond to its COP mandate and the needs and expectations of 
developing countries’ (Ernst & Young 2017, para. 84). The 2019 Joint 
Report of the TEC and CTCN indicates that resource mobilisation for 
the Network remains a challenge (TEC and CTCN 2019, pp. 23–24).
The importance of ‘financial support’ for strengthening cooperative 
action on technology development and transfer was recognised in 
Article 10.6 of the Paris Agreement. The technology framework 
established by the Paris Rulebook specifies actions and activities 
relating to the thematic area of ‘support’ as including: (i) enhancing 
the collaboration of the Technology Mechanism with the Financial 
Mechanism; (ii) identifying and promoting innovative finance and 
investment at different stages of the technology cycle; (iii) providing 
enhanced technical support to developing country Parties, in 
a  country-driven manner, and facilitating their access to financing 
for innovation, enabling environments and capacity building, 
developing and implementing the results of TNAs, and engagement 
and collaboration with stakeholders, including organisational and 
institutional support; and (d) enhancing the mobilisation of various 
types of support, including pro bono and in-kind support, from various 
sources for the implementation of actions and activities under each 
key theme of the technology framework. 
Notwithstanding the technology framework’s directive for enhanced 
collaboration of the Technology and Financial Mechanisms of 
the UNFCCC, linkages between them, and particularly to the GCF , 
continue to engender political contestation between developing and 
developed countries (Oh 2020b). Developing countries sought to 
address concerns over the unsustainable funding status of the CTCN 
by advocating linkage through a funding arrangement or financial 
linkage, whereas developed countries favour the design of an 
institutional linkage maintaining the different and separate mandates 
of the CTCN and the GCF (Oh 2020a,b). With no resolution reached, 
the UNFCCC COP requested the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, 
at its fifty-third session, to take stock of progress in strengthening 
the linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial 
Mechanism with a  view to recommending a  draft decision for 
consideration and adoption by the Glasgow COP , scheduled for 2021 
(UNFCCC 2019l).
14.4.3 Capacity Building
International climate cooperation has long focused on supporting 
developing countries in building capacity to implement climate 
mitigation actions. While there is no universally agreed definition of 
capacity building and the UNFCCC does not define the term (Khan 
et al. 2020), elements of capacity building can be discerned from 
the Convention’s provisions on education and training programmes 
(UNFCCC 1992, Art. 6), as well as the reference in Article 9(2)(d) to 
the SBSTA providing support for ‘endogenous capacity-building in 
developing countries’. 
Capacity building is generally conceived as taking place at three 
levels: individual (focused on knowledge, skills and training), 
organisational/institutional (focusing on organisational performance and institutional cooperation) and systemic (creating enabling 
environments through regulatory and economic policies (Khan et al. 
2020; UNFCCC 2021b). In its annual synthesis report for 2018, the 
UNFCCC secretariat compiled information submitted by Parties on 
the implementation of capacity building in developing countries, 
highlighting cooperative and regional activities on NDCs, including 
projects to build capacity for implementation, workshops related to 
transparency under the Paris Agreement and collaboration to provide 
coaching and training (UNFCCC 2019h). A  number of developing 
country Parties also highlighted their contributions to South–South 
cooperation (discussed further in Section  14.5.1.4), and identified 
capacity-building projects undertaken with others (e.g.,  capacity-
building for risk management in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
improving capacity for measurement, reporting and verification 
through the Alliance of the Pacific and a  climate action package 
launched by Singapore). 
Beyond the UNFCCC, other climate cooperation and partnership 
activities on capacity building include climate-related bilateral 
cooperation and those organised by the OECD, IFDD (Francophonie 
Institute for Sustainable Development), UNDP National 
Communications Support Programme, UNEP and the World Bank. 
Climate-related bilateral cooperation provides important human 
and institutional capacity building support for climate change 
actions and activities in developing countries, particularly through 
developed countries’ bilateral cooperation structures, such as the 
French Development Agency (AFD), the German Development Agency 
(The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit – GIZ), 
the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and others.
There are also a  number of regional cooperative structures with 
capacity-building components, including ClimaSouth, Euroclima+, 
the UN-REDD Programme, the Caribbean Regional Strategic 
Programme for Resilience, the Caribbean Climate Online Risk and 
Adaptation Tool, a project on accelerating low carbon and resilient 
society realisation in the Southeast Asian region, the World Health 
Organisation’s Global Salm-Surv network, the Red Iberoamericana 
de Oficinas de Cambio Climático network and the Africa Adaptation 
Initiative. Many climate-related capacity-building initiatives, 
including those coordinated or funded by international or regional 
institutions, are implemented at the national and sub-national levels, 
often with the involvement of universities, consultancy groups and 
civil society actors. 
It is also noted that comprehensive support is provided by the GCF 
to developing countries (GCF , 2020). This support is made available 
and accessible for all developing countries through three different 
GCF tools: the Readiness Programme, the Project Preparation 
Facility, and the funding of transformative projects and programmes. 
The goal of the Readiness Programme is to strengthen institutional 
capacities, governance mechanisms, and planning and programming 
competencies in support of developing countries’ transformational 
long-term climate policies (GCF , 2020). Despite a  decades-long 
process of capacity-building efforts under many development and 
environmental regimes, including the UNFCCC, progress has been 
uneven and largely unsuccessful in establishing institution-based 
improve capacity-building efforts within the UNFCCC, in 2015, 
the Paris Committee on Capacity-building (PCCB) was established 
by the COP decision accompanying the Paris Agreement as the 
primary body for enhancing capacity-building efforts, including by 
improving coherence and coordination in capacity-building activities 
(UNFCCC 2016a, para. 71). The activities of the Committee include 
the provision of guidance and technical support on climate change 
training and capacity building, raising awareness and sharing climate 
information and knowledge. During 2020, the PCCB was able, despite 
the COVID-19 situation, to hold its fourth meeting, implement and 
assess its 2017–2020 work plan, and develop and agree on its future 
roadmap (2021–2024) (UNFCCC Subsidiary Body for Implementation 
2020). Non-governmental organisations such as the Coalition on 
Paris Agreement Capacity-building provide expert input to the PCCB. 
Quantifying the contribution of capacity-building efforts to climate 
mitigation is acknowledged to be ‘difficult, if not impossible’ (Hsu 
et al. 2019a). Nonetheless, such activities ‘may play a valuable role in 
building a foundation for future reductions’ by providing ‘necessary 
catalytic linkages between actors’ (Hsu et al. 2019a).
14.4.4 Cooperative Mechanisms and Markets
In theory, trading carbon assets can reduce the costs of global climate 
mitigation, by helping facilitate abatement of greenhouse gases 
at least-cost locations. This could help countries ratchet up their 
ambitions more than in a situation without such mechanisms (Mehling 
et al. 2018), particularly if mechanisms are scaled up from projects and 
programmes (Michaelowa et al. 2019b). Progress as to developing 
such mechanisms has however so far been moderate and uneven. 
Of the three international market-based mechanisms under the 1997 
Kyoto Protocol discussed in Section 14.3.2.7, and in previous IPCC 
reports, only the CDM or a similar mechanism may have a role to 
play under the Paris Agreement, although the precise terms are yet 
to be decided. 
Article 6, also discussed in Section 14.3.2.7, is the main framework 
to foster enhanced cooperation within the Paris Agreement. 
Although there is an emerging global landscape of activities based 
on Article 6 (Greiner et al. 2020), such as the bilateral treaty signed 
under the framework of Article 6 in October 2020 by Switzerland 
and Peru, the possibilities of bilateral cooperation are yet to be fully 
exploited. As discussed above, adequate accounting rules are key to 
the success of Article 6. Sectoral agreements are also a promising 
cooperative mechanism, as discussed in Section  14.5.2. In fact, 
both bilateral and sectoral agreements have the potential to 
enhance the ambition of the Parties involved and can eventually 
serve as building blocks towards more comprehensive agreements 
(Section 14.2.2). 
A relevant and promising new development is the international 
linkage of existing regional or national emissions trading systems 
(ETS). Several ETS are now operational in different jurisdictions, including the EU, Switzerland, China, South Korea, New Zealand, 
Kazakhstan and several US states and Canadian provinces (Wettestad 
and Gulbrandsen 2018). More systems are in the pipeline, including 
Mexico and Thailand (ICAP 2019). The link between the EU and 
Switzerland entered into force in January 2020 and other linkages 
are being negotiated. Scholars analyse the potential benefits of these 
multilateral linkages and demonstrate that these can be significant 
(Doda et al. 2019; Doda and Taschini 2017). Over time, the linkages 
of national emissions trading systems can be seen as building blocks 
to a  strategic enlargement of international cooperation (Caparrós 
and Péreau 2017; Mehling 2019). The World Bank has emerged as an 
important lynchpin and facilitator of knowledge-building and sharing 
of lessons about the design and linking of carbon markets, through 
initiatives such as the Partnership for Market Readiness, Networked 
Carbon Markets and the Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition 
(Wettestad et al. 2021).
However, it is important to distinguish between theory and practice. 
The practice of ETS linking so far demonstrates a few attempts that 
did not result in linkages due to shifts of governments and political 
preferences (for instance the process between the EU and Australia, 
and Ontario withdrawing from the Western Climate Initiative) (Bailey 
and Inderberg 2018). It is worth noting that the linking of carbon 
markets raises problems of distribution of costs and loss of political 
control and hence does not offer a politically easy alternative route 
to a  truly international carbon market. Careful, piecemeal and 
incremental linking may be the most feasible approach forward 
(Green et al. 2014; Gulbrandsen et al. 2019). It is premature for any 
serious assessment of the practice of ETS linking to be conducted. 
Environmental effectiveness, transformative potential, economic 
performance, institutional strength and even distributional outcomes 
can potentially be significant and positive if linking is done carefully 
(Doda and Taschini 2017; Mehling et al. 2018; Doda et al. 2019), but 
are all marginal if one focuses on existing experiences (Spalding-
Fecher et al. 2012; Haites 2016; Schneider et al. 2017; La Hoz Theuer 
et al. 2019; Schneider et al. 2019).
14.4.5 International Governance of SRM and CDR 
While Solar Radiation Modification (SRM) and carbon dioxide 
removal (CDR) were often referred to as ‘geoengineering’ in earlier 
IPCC reports and in the literature, IPCC SR1.5 started to explore 
SRM and CDR more thoroughly and to highlight the differences 
between –  but also within –  both approaches more clearly. This 
section assesses international governance of both SRM and CDR, 
recognising that CDR, as a mitigation option, is covered elsewhere in 
this report, whereas SRM is not. Chapter 12 of this report covers the 
emerging national, sub-national and non-state governance of CDR, 
while Chapters 6, 7 and 12 also assess the mitigation potential, risks 
and co-benefits of some CDR options. Chapters 4 and 5 of AR6 WGI 
assess the physical climate system and biogeochemical responses 
to different SRM and CDR methods. Cross-Working Group Box 4 on 
SRM (AR6 WGII, Chapter  16; and Cross-Working Group Box  4  in 
this chapter) gives a brief overview of Solar Radiation Modification 
methods, risks, benefits, ethics and governance.
Authors: Govindasamy Bala (India), Heleen de Coninck (the Netherlands), Oliver Geden (Germany), Veronika Ginzburg (the Russian 
Federation), Katharine J. Mach (the United States of America), Anthony Patt (Switzerland), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Masahiro 
Sugiyama (Japan), Christopher H. Trisos (South Africa), Maarten van Aalst (the Netherlands)
Proposed Solar Radiation Modification schemes 
This cross-working group box assesses Solar Radiation Modification (SRM) proposals, their potential contribution to reducing or 
increasing climate risk, as well as other risks they may pose (categorised as risks from responses to climate change in the IPCC AR6 
risk definition in 1.2.1.1), and related perception, ethics and governance questions.
SRM refers to proposals to increase the reflection of shortwave radiation (sunlight) back to space to counteract anthropogenic warming 
and some of its harmful impacts (de Coninck et al. 2018) (AR6 WGI Chapters 4 and 5). A number of SRM options have been proposed, 
including: stratospheric aerosol interventions (SAI), marine cloud brightening (MCB), ground-based albedo modifications (GBAM), and 
ocean albedo change (OAC). Although not strictly a form of SRM, cirrus cloud thinning (CCT) has been proposed to cool the planet 
by increasing the escape of longwave thermal radiation to space and is included here for consistency with previous assessments 
(de Coninck et al. 2018). SAI is the most-researched proposal. Modelling studies show SRM could reduce surface temperatures and 
potentially ameliorate some climate change risks (with more confidence for SAI than other options), but SRM could also introduce 
a range of new risks.
There is high agreement in the literature that for addressing climate change risks, SRM cannot be the main policy response to climate 
change and is, at best, a supplement to achieving sustained net zero or net negative CO 2 emission levels globally (de Coninck et al. 
2018; MacMartin et al. 2018; Buck et al. 2020; National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medecine 2021). SRM contrasts with 
climate change mitigation activities, such as emissions reductions and CDR, as it introduces a ‘mask’ to the climate change problem 
by altering the Earth’s radiation budget, rather than attempting to address the root cause of the problem, which is the increase in 
GHGs in the atmosphere. In addition, the effects of proposed SRM options would only last as long as a deployment is maintained – for 
example, requiring a yearly injection of aerosols in the case of SAI as the lifetime of aerosols in the stratosphere is one to three years 
(Niemeier et al. 2011) or continuous spraying of sea salt in the case of MCB as the lifetime of sea salt aerosols in the atmosphere is 
only about 10 days – which contrasts with the long lifetime of CO 2 and its climate effects, with global warming resulting from CO 2 
emissions likely remaining at a similar level for a hundred years or more (MacDougall et al. 2020) and long-term climate effects of 
emitted CO 2 remaining for several hundreds to thousands of years (Solomon et al. 2009).
Which scenarios?
The choice of SRM deployment scenarios and reference scenarios is crucial in assessment of SRM risks and its effectiveness in 
attenuating climate change risks (Keith and MacMartin 2015; Honegger et al. 2021a). Most climate model simulations have used 
scenarios with highly stylised large SRM forcing to fully counteract large amounts of warming in order to enhance the signal-to-noise 
ratio of climate responses to SRM (Kravitz et al. 2015; Sugiyama et al. 2018a; Krishnamohan et al. 2019).
The effects of SRM fundamentally depend on a variety of choices about deployment (Sugiyama et al. 2018b), including: its position 
in the portfolio of human responses to climate change (e.g., the magnitude of SRM used against the background radiative forcing), 
governance of research and potential deployment strategies, and technical details (latitude, materials, and season, among others, 
see AR6 WGI Chapter 4.6.3.3). The plausibility of many SRM scenarios is highly contested and not all scenarios are equally plausible 
because of socio-political considerations (Talberg et al. 2018), as with, for example, CDR (Fuss et al. 2014, 2018). Development 
of scenarios and their selection in assessments should reflect a diverse set of societal values with public and stakeholder inputs 
(Sugiyama et al. 2018a; Low and Honegger 2020), as depending on the focus of a limited climate model simulation, SRM could look 
grossly risky or highly beneficial (Pereira et al. 2021).
In the context of reaching the long-term global temperature goal of the Paris Agreement, there are different hypothetical scenarios 
of SRM deployment: early, substantial mitigation with no SRM, more limited or delayed mitigation with moderate SRM, unchecked 
emissions with total reliance on SRM, and regionally heterogeneous SRM. Each scenario presents different levels and distributions 
of SRM benefits, side effects, and risks. The more intense the SRM deployment, the larger is the likelihood for the risks of side effects 
and environmental risks (e.g., Heutel et al., 2018). Regional disparities in climate hazards may result from both regionally-deployed 
SRM options such as GBAM, and more globally uniform SRM such as SAI (Jones et al. 2018; Seneviratne et al. 2018). There is an 
emerging literature on smaller forcings of SAI to reduce global average warming, for instance, to hold global warming to 1.5°C or 2°C 
alongside ambitious conventional mitigation (Jones et al. 2018; MacMartin et al. 2018), or bring down temperature after an overshoot 
(Tilmes et al. 2020). If emissions reductions and CDR are deemed insufficient, SRM may be seen by some as the only option left to 
ensure the achievement of the Paris Agreement’s temperature goal by 2100.
SRM risks to human and natural systems and potential for risk reduction
Since AR5, hundreds of climate modelling studies have simulated effects of SRM on climate hazards (Kravitz et al. 2015; Tilmes et al. 
2018). Modelling studies have shown SRM has the potential to offset some effects of increasing GHGs on the global and regional 
climate, including the increase in frequency and intensity of extremes of temperature and precipitation, melting of Arctic sea ice and 
mountain glaciers, weakening of Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, changes in frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones, 
and decrease in soil moisture (AR6 WGI, Chapter  4). However, while SRM may be effective in alleviating anthropogenic climate 
Cross-Working Group Box 4, Table 1 | SRM options and their potential climate and non-climate impacts. Description, potential climate impacts, 
potential impacts on human and natural systems, and termination effects of a number of SRM options: stratospheric aerosol interventions 
(SAI), marine cloud brightening (MCB), ocean albedo change (OAC), ground-based albedo modifications (GBAM), and cirrus cloud thinning (CCT).
SRM option SAI MCB OAC GBAM CCT
DescriptionInjection of reflective 
aerosol particles directly 
into the stratosphere or 
a gas which then
converts to aerosols that 
reflect sunlightSpraying sea salt or 
other particles in marine 
clouds, making them 
more reflectiveIncrease surface albedo of 
the ocean (e.g., by creating 
microbubbles or placing 
reflective foam on 
the surface)Whitening roofs, 
changes in land use 
management (e.g., no-till 
farming, bioengineering 
to make crop leaves 
more reflective), desert 
albedo enhancement, 
covering glaciers with 
reflective sheetingSeeding to promote 
nucleation of cirrus clouds, 
reducing optical thickness 
and cloud lifetime to allow 
more outgoing longwave 
radiation to escape 
to space
Potential 
climate impacts 
other than 
reduced warmingChange precipitation 
and runoff pattern; 
reduced temperature and 
precipitation extremes; 
precipitation reduction in 
some monsoon regions; 
decrease in direct and 
increase in diffuse sunlight 
at surface; changes to 
stratospheric dynamics and 
chemistry; potential
delay in ozone hole 
recovery; changes 
in surface ozone 
and UV radiationChange in land–sea 
contrast in temperature 
and precipitation, 
regional precipitation 
and runoff changes Change in land–sea 
contrast in temperature 
and precipitation, 
regional precipitation 
and runoff changes.Changes in regional 
precipitation pattern, 
regional extremes and 
regional circulationChanges in temperature 
and precipitation pattern, 
altered regional water 
cycle, increase in sunlight 
reaching the surface
Potential impacts 
on human and 
natural systemsChanges in crop yields, 
changes in land and ocean 
ecosystem productivity, 
acid rain (if using sulphate), 
reduced risk of heat stress 
to coralsChanges in regional ocean 
productivity, changes in 
crop yields, reduced heat 
stress for corals, changes 
in ecosystem productivity 
on land, sea salt deposition 
over land UnresearchedAltered photosynthesis and 
carbon uptake and side 
effects on biodiversity Altered photosynthesis  
and carbon uptake 
Termination 
effectsSudden and sustained 
termination would result in 
rapid warming, and abrupt 
changes to water cycle. 
Magnitude of termination 
depends on the degree of 
warming offset. Sudden and sustained
termination would result in 
rapid warming, and abrupt 
changes to water cycle. 
Magnitude of termination 
depends on the degree of 
warming offset. Sudden and sustained
termination would 
result in rapid warming. 
Magnitude of termination 
depends on the degree 
of warming offset. GBAM can be maintained 
over several years without 
major termination effects 
because of its regional 
scale of application.
Magnitude of termination 
depends on the degree 
of warming offset. Sudden and sustained
termination would 
result in rapid warming. 
Magnitude of termination 
depends on the degree 
of warming offset. 
References (also 
see main text of 
this box)Visioni et al. (2017)
Tilmes et al. (2018)
Simpson et al. (2019)Latham et al. (2012)
Ahlm et al. (2017)
Stjern et al. (2018)Evans et al. (2010)
Crook et al. (2015)Davin et al. (2014)
Crook et al. (2015)
Zhang et al. (2016)
Field et al. (2018)
Seneviratne et al. (2018)Storelvmo and Herger 
(2014)
Crook et al. (2015)
Jackson et al. (2016)
Duan et al. (2020)
Gasparini et al. (2020)
warming either locally or globally, it would not maintain the climate in a present-day state nor return the climate to a pre-industrial 
state (climate averaged over 1850–1900) (AR6 WGI, Box 1.2) in all regions and in all seasons even when used to fully offset the global 
mean warming (high confidence) (AR6 WGI Chapter 4). This is because the climate forcing and response to SRM options are different 
from the forcing and response to GHG increase. Because of these differences in climate forcing and response patterns, the regional 
and seasonal climates of a world with a global mean warming of 1.5°C or 2°C achieved via SRM would be different from a world with 
similar global mean warming but achieved through mitigation (MacMartin et al. 2018). At the regional scale and seasonal timescale 
there could be considerable residual climate change and/or overcompensating change (e.g., more cooling, wetting or drying than just 
what’s needed to offset warming, drying or wetting due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions), and there is low confidence in 
understanding of the climate response to SRM at the regional scale (AR6 WGI, Chapter 4).
SAI implemented to partially offset warming (e.g., offsetting half of global warming) may have potential to ameliorate hazards in 
multiple regions and reduce negative residual change, such as drying compared to present-day climate, that are associated with fully 
offsetting global mean warming (Irvine and Keith 2020), but may also increase flood and drought risk in Europe compared to unmitigated 
warming (Jones et al. 2021). Recent modelling studies suggest it is conceptually possible to meet multiple climate objectives through 
optimally designed SRM strategies (WGI, Chapter 4). Nevertheless, large uncertainties still exist for climate processes associated with 
SRM options (e.g., aerosol-cloud-radiation interaction) (AR6 WGI, Chapter 4) (Kravitz and MacMartin 2020).
Compared with climate hazards, many fewer studies have examined SRM risks – the potential adverse consequences to people and 
ecosystems from the combination of climate hazards, exposure and vulnerability – or the potential for SRM to reduce risk (Curry et al. 
2014; Irvine et al. 2017). Risk analyses have often used inputs from climate models forced with stylised representations of SRM, such 
as dimming the sun. Fewer have used inputs from climate models that explicitly simulated injection of gases or aerosols into the 
atmosphere, which include more complex cloud-radiative feedbacks. Most studies have used scenarios where SAI is deployed to hold 
average global temperature constant despite high emissions.
There is low confidence and large uncertainty in projected impacts of SRM on crop yields due in part to a limited number of studies. 
Because SRM would result in only a slight reduction in CO 2 concentrations relative to the emissions scenario without SRM (AR6 
WGI, Chapter  5), the CO 2 fertilisation effect on plant productivity is nearly the same in emissions scenarios with and without 
SRM. Nevertheless, changes in climate due to SRM are likely to have some impacts on crop yields. A single study indicates MCB may 
reduce crop failure rates compared to climate change from a doubling of CO 2 pre-industrial concentrations (Parkes et al. 2015). Models 
suggest SAI cooling would reduce crop productivity at higher latitudes compared to a scenario without SRM by reducing the growing 
season length, but benefit crop productivity in lower latitudes by reducing heat stress (Pongratz et al. 2012; Xia et al. 2014; Zhan et al. 
2019). Crop productivity is also projected to be reduced where SAI reduces rainfall relative to the scenario without SRM, including 
a case where reduced Asian summer monsoon rainfall causes a reduction in groundnut yields (Xia et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2016). 
SAI will increase the fraction of diffuse sunlight, which is projected to increase photosynthesis in forested canopy, but will reduce 
the direct and total available sunlight, which tends to reduce photosynthesis. As total sunlight is reduced, there is a net reduction 
in crop photosynthesis with the result that any benefits to crops from avoided heat stress may be offset by reduced photosynthesis, 
as indicated by a single statistical modelling study (Proctor et al. 2018). SAI would reduce average surface ozone concentration (Xia 
et al. 2017) mainly as a result of aerosol-induced reduction in stratospheric ozone in polar regions, resulting in reduced downward 
transport of ozone to the troposphere (Pitari et al. 2014; Tilmes et al. 2018). The reduction in stratospheric ozone also allows more UV 
radiation to reach the surface. The reduction in surface ozone, together with an increase in surface UV radiation, would have important 
implications for crop yields but there is low confidence in our understanding of the net impact.
Few studies have assessed potential SRM impacts on human health and well-being. SAI using sulfate aerosols is projected to deplete 
the ozone layer, increasing mortality from skin cancer, and SAI could increase particulate matter due to offsetting warming, reduced 
precipitation and deposition of SAI aerosols, which would increase mortality, but SAI also reduces surface-level ozone exposure, which 
would reduce mortality from air pollution, with net changes in mortality uncertain and depending on aerosol type and deployment 
scenario (Effiong and Neitzel 2016; Eastham et al. 2018; Dai et al. 2020). However, these effects may be small compared to changes 
in risk from infectious disease (e.g., mosquito-borne illnesses) or food security due to SRM influences on climate (Carlson et al. 2022). 
Using volcanic eruptions as a natural analogue, a sudden implementation of SAI that forced the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
system may increase risk of severe cholera outbreaks in Bengal (Trisos et al. 2018; Pinke et al. 2019). Considering only mean annual 
temperature and precipitation, SAI that stabilises global temperature at its present-day level is projected to reduce income inequality 
between countries compared to the highest warming pathway (RCP8.5) (Harding et al. 2020). Some integrated assessment model 
scenarios have included SAI (Arino et al. 2016; Emmerling and Tavoni 2018; Heutel et al. 2018; Helwegen et al. 2019; Rickels et al. 
2020) showing the indirect costs and benefits to welfare dominate, since the direct economic cost of SAI itself is expected to be 
relatively low (Moriyama et al. 2017; Smith and Wagner 2018). There is a general lack of research on the wide scope of potential risk 
or risk reduction to human health, well-being and sustainable development from SRM and on their distribution across countries and 
vulnerable groups (Honegger et al. 2021a; Carlson et al. 2022).
SRM may also introduce novel risks for international collaboration and peace. Conflicting temperature preferences between countries 
may lead to counter-geoengineering measures such as deliberate release of warming agents or destruction of deployment equipment 
(Parker et al. 2018). Game-theoretic models and laboratory experiments indicate a powerful actor or group with a higher preference 
for SRM may use SAI to cool the planet beyond what is socially optimal, imposing welfare losses on others although this cooling does 
not necessarily imply excluded countries would be worse off relative to a world of unmitigated warming (Ricke et al. 2013; Weitzman 
2015; Abatayo et al. 2020). In this context, counter-geoengineering may promote international cooperation or lead to large welfare 
losses (Helwegen et al. 2019; Abatayo et al. 2020).
Cooling caused by SRM would increase the global land and ocean CO 2 sinks (medium confidence), but this would not stop CO 2 from 
increasing in the atmosphere or affect the resulting ocean acidification under continued anthropogenic emissions (high confidence) 
(AR6 WGI, Chapter 5). 
Few studies have assessed potential SRM impacts on ecosystems. SAI and MCB may reduce risk of coral reef bleaching compared 
to global warming with no SAI (Latham et al. 2013; Kwiatkowski et al. 2015), but risks to marine life from ocean acidification would 
remain, because SRM proposals do not reduce elevated anthropogenic atmospheric CO 2 concentrations. MCB could cause changes in 
marine net primary productivity by reducing light availability in deployment regions, with important fishing regions off the west coast 
of South America showing both large increases and decreases in productivity (Partanen et al. 2016; Keller 2018).
There is large uncertainty in terrestrial ecosystem responses to SRM.  By decoupling increases in atmospheric greenhouse gas 
concentrations and temperature, SAI could generate substantial impacts on large-scale biogeochemical cycles, with feedbacks to 
regional and global climate variability and change (Zarnetske et al. 2021). Compared to a high CO 2 world without SRM, global-scale 
SRM simulations indicate reducing heat stress in low latitudes would increase plant productivity, but cooling would also slow down 
the process of nitrogen mineralisation, which could decrease plant productivity (Glienke et al. 2015; Duan et al. 2020). In high latitude 
and polar regions SRM may limit vegetation growth compared to a high CO 2 world without SRM, but net primary productivity may still 
be higher than pre-industrial climate (Glienke et al. 2015). Tropical forests cycle more carbon and water than other terrestrial biomes 
but large areas of the tropics may tip between savanna and tropical forest depending on rainfall and fire (Beer et al. 2010; Staver et 
al. 2011). Thus, SAI-induced reductions in precipitation in Amazonia and central Africa are expected to change the biogeography of 
tropical ecosystems in ways different both from present-day climate and global warming without SAI (Simpson et al. 2019; Zarnetske 
et al. 2021). This would have potentially large consequences for ecosystem services (AR6 WGII, Chapters 2 and 9). When designing 
and evaluating SAI scenarios, biome-specific responses need to be considered if SAI approaches are to benefit rather than harm 
ecosystems. Regional precipitation change and sea salt deposition over land from MCB may increase or decrease primary productivity 
in tropical rainforests (Muri et al. 2015). SRM that fully offsets warming could reduce the dispersal velocity required for species to 
track shifting temperature niches whereas partially offsetting warming with SAI would not reduce this risk unless rates of warming 
were also reduced (Trisos et al. 2018; Dagon and Schrag 2019). SAI may reduce high fire-risk weather in Australia, Europe and parts 
of the Americas, compared to global warming without SAI (Burton et al. 2018). Yet SAI using sulphur injection could shift the spatial 
distribution of acid-induced aluminium soil toxicity into relatively undisturbed ecosystems in Europe and North America (Visioni et 
al. 2020). For the same amount of global mean cooling, SAI, MCB, and CCT would have different effects on gross and net primary 
productivity because of different spatial patterns of temperature, available sunlight, and hydrological cycle changes (Duan et al. 
2020). Large-scale modification of land surfaces for GBAM may have strong trade-offs with biodiversity and other ecosystem services, 
including food security (Seneviratne et al. 2018). Although existing studies indicate SRM will have widespread impacts on ecosystems, 
risks and potential for risk reduction for marine and terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity remain largely unknown.
A sudden and sustained termination of SRM in a high CO 2 emissions scenario would cause rapid climate change (high confidence) 
(AR6 WGI, Chapter 4). More scenario analysis is needed on the potential likelihood of sudden termination (Kosugi 2013; Irvine and 
Keith 2020). A gradual phase-out of SRM combined with emissions reduction and CDR could avoid these termination effects (medium 
confidence) (MacMartin et al. 2014; Keith and MacMartin 2015; Tilmes et al. 2016). Several studies find that large and extremely rapid 
warming and abrupt changes to the water cycle would occur within a decade if a sudden termination of SAI occurred (McCusker et 
al. 2014; Crook et al. 2015). The size of this ‘termination shock’ is proportional to the amount of radiative forcing being masked by 
SAI. A sudden termination of SAI could place many thousands of species at risk of extinction, because the resulting rapid warming 
would be too fast for species to track the changing climate (Trisos et al. 2018).
Public perceptions of SRM
Studies on the public perception of SRM have used multiple methods: questionnaire surveys, workshops, and focus group interviews 
(Burns et al. 2016; Cummings et al. 2017). Most studies have been limited to Western societies with some exceptions. Studies have 
repeatedly found that respondents are largely unaware of SRM (Merk et al. 2015). In the context of this general lack of familiarity, 
the publics prefer carbon dioxide removal (CDR) to SRM (Pidgeon et al. 2012), are very cautious about SRM deployment because of 
potential environmental side effects and governance concerns, and mostly reject deployment for the foreseeable future. Studies also 
suggest conditional and reluctant support for research, including proposed field experiments, with conditions of proper governance 
(Sugiyama et al. 2020). Recent studies show that the perception varies with the intensity of deliberation (Merk et al. 2019), and that 
the public distinguishes different funding sources (Nelson et al. 2021). Limited studies for developing countries show a tendency for 
respondents to be more open to SRM (Visschers et al. 2017; Sugiyama et al. 2020), perhaps because they experience climate change 
more directly (Carr and Yung 2018). In some Anglophone countries, a small portion of the public believes in chemtrail conspiracy 
theories, which are easily found in social media (Tingley and Wagner 2017; Allgaier 2019). Since researchers rarely distinguish different 
SRM options in engagement studies, there remains uncertainty in public perception.
Ethics 
There is broad literature on ethical considerations around SRM, mainly stemming from philosophy or political theory, and mainly 
focused on SAI (Flegal et al. 2019). There is concern that publicly debating, researching and potentially deploying SAI could involve 
a ‘moral hazard’, with potential to obstruct ongoing and future mitigation efforts (Morrow 2014; Baatz 2016; McLaren 2016), while 
empirical evidence is limited and mostly at the individual, not societal, level (Burns et al. 2016; Merk et al. 2016; Merk et al. 2019). 
There is low agreement whether research and outdoors experimentation will create a ‘slippery slope’ toward eventual deployment, 
leading to a lock-in to long-term SRM, or whether it can be effectively regulated at a later stage to avoid undesirable outcomes (Hulme 
2014; Parker 2014; Callies 2019; McKinnon 2019). Regarding potential deployment of SRM, procedural, distributive and recognitional 
conceptions of justice are being explored (Svoboda and Irvine 2014; Svoboda 2017; Preston and Carr 2018; Hourdequin 2019). With 
the SRM research community’s increasing focus on distributional impacts of SAI, researchers have started more explicitly considering 
inequality in participation and inclusion of vulnerable countries and marginalised social groups (Flegal and Gupta 2018; Whyte 
2018; Táíwò and Talati 2021), including considering stopping research (Stephens and Surprise 2020; National Academies of Sciences 
Engineering and Medecine 2021). There is recognition that SRM research has been conducted predominantly by a relatively small 
number of experts in the Global North, and that more can be done to enable participation from diverse peoples and geographies in 
setting research agendas and research governance priorities, and undertaking research, with initial efforts to this effect (Rahman et al. 
2018), noting that unequal power relations in participation could influence SRM research governance and have potential implications 
for policy (Winickoff et al. 2015; Frumhoff and Stephens 2018; Whyte 2018; Biermann and Möller 2019; McLaren and Corry 2021; 
National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medecine 2021; Táíwò and Talati 2021).
Governance of research and of deployment
Currently, there is no dedicated, formal international SRM governance for research, development, demonstration, or deployment (AR6 
WGIII, Chapter 14). Some multilateral agreements – such as the UN Convention on Biological Diversity or the Vienna Convention on 
the Protection of the Ozone Layer – indirectly and partially cover SRM, but none is comprehensive and the lack of robust and formal 
SRM governance poses risks (Ricke et al. 2013; Talberg et al. 2018; Reynolds 2019a). While governance objectives range broadly, from 
prohibition to enabling research and potentially deployment (Sugiyama et al. 2018b; Gupta et al. 2020), there is agreement that SRM 
governance should cover all interacting stages of research through to any potential, eventual deployment with rules, institutions, 
and norms (Reynolds 2019b). Accordingly, governance arrangements are co-evolving with respective SRM technologies across the 
interacting stages of research, development, demonstration, and – potentially – deployment (Rayner et al. 2013; Parker 2014; Parson 
2014). Stakeholders are developing governance already in outdoors research; for example, for MCB and OAC experiments on the 
Great Barrier Reef (McDonald et al. 2019). Co-evolution of governance and SRM research provides a chance for responsibly developing 
SRM technologies with broader public participation and political legitimacy, guarding against potential risks and harms relevant 
across a full range of scenarios, and ensuring that SRM is considered only as a part of a broader portfolio of responses to climate 
change (Stilgoe 2015; Nicholson et al. 2018). For SAI, large-scale outdoor experiments even with low radiative forcing could be 
transboundary and those with deployment-scale radiative forcing may not be distinguished from deployment, such that MacMartin 
and Kravitz (2019) argue for continued reliance on modelling until a decision on whether and how to deploy is made, with modelling 
helping governance development. 
14.4.5.1 Global Governance of Solar Radiation Modification 
and Associated Risks
Solar radiation modification, in the literature also referred to as ‘solar 
geoengineering’, refers to the intentional modification of the Earth’s 
shortwave radiative budget, such as by increasing the reflection of 
sunlight back to space, with the aim of reducing warming. Several 
SRM options have been proposed, including stratospheric aerosol 
injection (SAI), marine cloud brightening (MCB), ground-based 
albedo modifications (GBAM), and ocean albedo change (OAC). SRM 
has been discussed as a potential response option within a broader 
climate risk management strategy, as a  supplement to emissions 
reduction, carbon dioxide removal and adaptation (Crutzen 2006; 
Shepherd 2009; Caldeira and Bala 2017; Buck et al. 2020), for 
example as a temporary measure to slow the rate of warming (Keith 
and MacMartin 2015) or address temperature overshoot (MacMartin 
et al. 2018; Tilmes et al. 2020). SRM assessments of potential benefits 
and risks still primarily rely on modelling efforts and their underlying 
scenario assumptions (Sugiyama et al. 2018a), for example in the 
context of the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project 
GeoMIP6 (Kravitz et al. 2015). Recently, small-scale MCB and 
OAC experiments started to take place on the Great Barrier Reef 
(McDonald et al. 2019).
SAI –  the most researched SRM method –  poses significant 
international governance challenges since it could potentially 
be deployed uni- or minilaterally and alter the global mean 
temperature much faster than any other climate policy measure, 
at comparatively low direct costs (Parson 2014; Nicholson et al. 
2018; Smith and Wagner 2018; Sugiyama et al. 2018b; Reynolds 
2019a). While being dependent on the design of deployment 
systems, both geophysical benefits and adverse effects would 
potentially be unevenly distributed (AR6 WGI, Chapter  4). 
Perceived local harm could exacerbate geopolitical conflicts, not 
least depending on which countries are part of a  deployment 
coalition (Maas and Scheffran 2012; Zürn and Schäfer 2013), but 
also because immediate attribution of climatic impacts to detected 
SAI deployment would not be possible. Uncoordinated or poorly 
researched deployment by a limited number of states, triggered by 
perceived climate emergencies, could create international tensions 
(Corry 2017; Lederer and Kreuter 2018). An additional risk is that 
of rapid temperature rise following an abrupt end of SAI activities 
(Parker and Irvine 2018; Rabitz 2019).While there is room for national and even sub-national governance of 
SAI – for example on research (differentiating indoor from open-air) 
(Jinnah et al. 2018; Hubert 2020) and public engagement (Bellamy 
and Lezaun 2017; Flegal et al. 2019) – international governance of 
SAI faces the challenge that comprehensive institutional architectures 
designed too far in advance could prove either too restrictive or too 
permissive in light of subsequent political, institutional, geophysical 
and technological developments (Sugiyama et al. 2018a; Reynolds 
2019a). Views on governance encompass a broad range, from aiming 
to restrict to wanting to enable research and potentially deployment; 
in between these poles, other authors stress the operationalisation 
of the precautionary approach: preventing deployment until specific 
criteria regarding scientific consensus, impact assessments and 
governance issues are met (Tedsen and Homann 2013; Wieding 
et al. 2020). Many scholars suggest that governance arrangements 
ought to co-evolve with respective SRM technologies (Parker 2014), 
including that it stay at least one step ahead of research, development, 
demonstration, and – potentially – deployment (Rayner et al. 2013; 
Parson 2014). With the modelling community’s increasing focus on 
showing that, and in what ways, SAI could help to minimise climate 
change impacts in the Global South, the SRM governance literature 
has come to include considerations of how SAI could contribute 
to global equity (Horton and Keith 2016; Flegal and Gupta 2018; 
Hourdequin 2018).
Given that risks and potential benefits of SRM proposals differ 
substantially and their large-scale deployment is highly speculative, 
there is a wide array of concrete proposals for near-term anticipatory 
or adaptive governance. Numerous authors suggest a  wide range 
of governance principles Nicholson et al. (2018) encapsulate most 
of these in suggesting a  list of four: (i) Guard against potential 
risks and harm; (ii) Enable appropriate research and development 
of scientific knowledge; (iii) Legitimise any future research or 
policymaking through active and informed public and expert 
community engagement; (iv) Ensure that SRM is considered only 
as a  part of a  broader, mitigation-centred portfolio of responses 
to climate change. Regarding international institutionalisation, 
options range from formal integration into existing UN bodies like 
the UNFCCC (Nicholson et al. 2018) or the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (CBD) (Bodle et al. 2014) to the creation of specific, but 
less formalised global fora (Parson and Ernst 2013) to forms of club 
governance (Bodansky 2013; Lloyd and Oppenheimer 2014). Recent 
years have also seen the emergence of transnational non-state actors 
(Horton and Koremenos 2020).
Currently, there is no targeted international law relating to SRM, 
although some multilateral agreements –  such as the Convention 
on Biological Diversity, the UN Convention on the Law of the 
Sea, the Environmental Modification Convention, and the Vienna 
Convention on the Protection of the Ozone Layer and its Montreal 
Protocol  –  contain provisions applicable to SRM (Bodansky 2013; 
Jinnah and Nicholson 2019; Reynolds 2019a).
14.4.5.2 Carbon Dioxide Removal 
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) refers to a  cluster of technologies, 
practices, and approaches that remove and sequester carbon dioxide 
from the ocean and atmosphere and durably store it in geological, 
terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in products (Table 12.6). In contrast 
to SRM, CDR does not necessarily impose transboundary risks, except 
insofar as misleading accounting of its use and deployment could give 
a false picture of countries’ overall mitigation efforts. CDR is clearly 
a form of climate change mitigation, and as described in Chapter 12 
is needed to counterbalance residual GHG emissions that may prove 
hard to abate (e.g., from industry, aviation or agriculture) in the context 
of reaching net zero emissions both globally – in the context of Article 

for reducing atmospheric CO 2 concentrations by providing net negative 
emissions at the global level (Fuglestvedt et al. 2018; Bellamy and 
Geden 2019). Despite the common feature of removing carbon dioxide, 
technologies like afforestation/reforestation, soil carbon sequestration, 
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage, direct air capture with 
carbon storage, enhanced weathering, ocean alkalinity enhancement 
or ocean fertilisation are very different, as are the governance 
challenges. Chapter  12 highlights the sustainable development risks 
associated with land and water use that are connected to the biological 
approaches to CDR. As a public good which largely lacks incentives 
to be pursued as a business case, most types of CDR require a suite 
of dedicated policy instruments that address both near-term needs as 
well as long-term continuity at scale (Honegger et al. 2021b).
CDR methods other than afforestation/reforestation and soil carbon 
sequestration have only played a minor role in UNFCCC negotiations 
so far (Fridahl 2017; Rumpel et al. 2020). To accelerate, and indeed 
better manage CDR globally, stringent rules and practices regarding 
emissions accounting, measuring, reporting and verifying and 
project-based market mechanisms have been proposed (Honegger 
and Reiner 2018; Mace et al. 2018). Given their historic responsibility, 
it can be expected that developed countries would carry the main 
burden of researching, developing, demonstrating and deploying 
CDR, or finance such projects in other countries (Fyson et al. 2020; 
Pozo et al. 2020). McLaren et al. (2019) suggest that there is 
a  rationale for separating the international commitments for net 
negative emissions from those for emissions reductions.
Specific regulations on CDR options have been limited to those 
posing transboundary risks, namely the use of ocean fertilisation. 
In a series of separate decisions from 2008 to 2013, Parties to the 
London Convention and Protocol limited ocean fertilisation activities to only those of a  research character, and in 2012 the CBD made 
a  non-legally-binding decision to do the same, further requiring 
such research activities to be limited scale, and carried out under 
controlled conditions, until more knowledge is gained to be able to 
assess the risks (GESAMP 2019; Burns and Corbett 2020). In doing 
so they have taken a  precautionary approach (Sands and  Peel, 
2018). The London Convention and Protocol has also developed 
an Assessment Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean 
Fertilisation (London Convention/Protocol 2010) and in 2013 adopted 
amendments (which are not yet in force) to regulate marine carbon 
dioxide removal activities, including ocean fertilisation. 
14.5 Multi-level, Multi-actor Governance
The Paris Agreement sets in place a new framework for international 
climate policy (Paroussos et al. 2019), which some cite as evidence 
of ‘hybrid multilateralism’ (Christoff 2016; Savaresi 2016; Bäckstrand 
et al. 2017). While a  trend of widening involvement of non-state 
actors was evident prior to conclusion of the Paris Agreement, 
particularly at UNFCCC COPs, the ‘new landscape of international 
climate cooperation’ features an ‘intensified interplay between 
state and non-state actors’, including civil society and social 
movements, business actors, and sub-national or substate actors, 
such as local governments and cities (Bäckstrand et al. 2017, p. 562). 
This involvement of other actors beyond states in international climate  
cooperation is facilitated by the Paris Agreement’s ‘hybrid 
climate policy architecture’ (Bodansky et al. 2016) (Section 14.3.1.1), 
which acknowledges the primacy of domestic politics in climate change 
and invites the mobilisation of international and domestic pressure 
to make the Agreement effective (Falkner 2016b). In this landscape, 
there is greater flexibility for more decentralised ‘polycentric’ forms 
of climate governance and recognition of the benefits of working in 
diverse forms and groups to realise global climate mitigation goals 
(Jordan et al. 2015; Oberthür 2016) (Section 1.9). 
Increasing attention has focused on the role of multi-level, multi-
actor cooperation among actors, groupings and agreements beyond 
the UNFCCC climate regime as potential ‘building blocks’ towards 
enhanced international action on climate mitigation (Falkner 
2016a; Caparrós and Péreau 2017; Potoski 2017; Stewart et al. 
2017). This can include agreements on emissions and technologies 
at the regional or sub-global level, what scholars often refer to as 
‘climate clubs’ (Nordhaus 2015; Hovi et al. 2016; Green 2017; Sprinz 
et al. 2018). One forum through which such agreements are often 
discussed, in support of UNFCCC objectives, is high-level meetings 
of political leaders, such as the G7 and G20 states (Livingston 2016). 
It also includes cooperation on narrower sets of issues than are 
found within the Paris Agreement, for instance, other international 
environmental agreements dealing with a  particular subset of 
GHGs; linkages with, or leveraging of, efforts or agreements in other 
spheres such as adaptation, human rights or trade; agreements 
within particular economic sectors; or transnational initiatives 
involving global cooperative efforts by different types of non-state 
actors. Cooperative efforts in each of these forums are reviewed 
in the following sections of the chapter. Section  14.5.1 discusses 
international cooperation at multiple governance levels (global, 
international sectoral agreements and institutions such as in the 
forestry, energy and transportation sectors; and Sections 14.5.3–
14.5.5 discuss transnational cooperation across civil society and 
social movements, business partnerships and investor coalitions, and 
between sub-national entities and cities, respectively. 
A key idea underpinning this analysis is that decomposition of 
the larger challenge of climate mitigation into ‘smaller units’ may 
facilitate more effective cooperation (Sabel and Victor 2017) and 
complement cooperation in the UN climate regime (Stewart et al. 
2017). However, it is recognised that significant uncertainty remains 
over the feasibility and costs of these efforts (Sabel and Victor 2017), 
as well as whether they ultimately strengthen progress on climate 
mitigation in the multilateral climate arena (Falkner 2016a).
14.5.1 International Cooperation at Multiple 
Governance Levels
14.5.1.1 Role of Other Environmental Agreements
International cooperation on climate change mitigation takes place 
at multiple governance levels, including under a range of multilateral 
environmental agreements (MEAs) beyond those of the international 
climate regime. 
The 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer (the Montreal Protocol) is the leading example of a  non-
climate MEA with significant implications for mitigating climate 
change (Barrett 2008). The Montreal Protocol regulates a  number 
of substances that are both ozone-depleting substances (ODS) and 
GHGs with a significant global warming potential (GWP), including 
chlorofluorocarbons, halons and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). 
As a  result, implementation of phase-out requirements for these 
substances under the Montreal Protocol has made a  significant 
contribution to mitigating climate change (Molina et al. 2009) 
(Section 9.9.7.1). Velders et al. (2007) found that over the period from 

expected with compliance to the provisions of the Montreal Protocol 
was 8 GtCO 2-eq yr–1, an amount substantially greater than the first 
commitment period Kyoto reduction target. Young et al. (2021) 
suggest that the Montreal Protocol may also be helping to mitigate 
climate change through avoided decreases in the land carbon sink.
The 2016 Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol applies to the 
production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). HFCs, 
which are widely used as refrigerants (Abas et al. 2018), have a high 
GWP100 of 14,600 for HFC-23, and are not ODS (Section 9.9.7.1). 
The Kigali Amendment addresses the risk that the phase-out of 
HCFCs under the Montreal Protocol and their replacement with 
HFCs could exacerbate global warming (Akanle 2010; Hurwitz 
et al. 2016), especially with the predicted growth in HFC usage for 
applications like air conditioners (Velders et al. 2015). In this way it 
creates a cooperative rather than a conflictual relationship between 
addressing ozone depletion and the climate protection goals of the 
UNFCCC regime (Hoch et al. 2019). The Kigali Amendment requires developed country Parties to phase down HFCs by 85% from 2011 
to 2013 levels by 2036. Developing country Parties are permitted 
longer phase-down periods (out to 2045 and 2047), but must freeze 
production and consumption between 2024 and 2028 (Ripley and 
Verkuijl 2016; UN 2016). A ban on trade in HFCs with non-Parties 
will come into effect from 1  January 2033. For HFC-23, which is 
a  by-product of HCFC production rather than an ODS, Parties are 
required to report production and consumption data, and to destroy 
all emissions of HFC-23 occurring as part of HCFCs or HFCs to the 
extent practicable from 2020 onwards using approved technologies 
(Ripley and Verkuijl 2016). 
Full compliance with the Kigali Amendment is predicted to reduce 
HFC emissions by 61% of the global baseline by 2050 (Höglund-
Isaksson et al. 2017), with avoided global warming in 2100 due to 
HFCs from a baseline of 0.3°C–0.5°C to less than 0.1°C (WMO 2018). 
Examining the interplay of the Kigali Amendment with the Paris 
Agreement, Hoch et al. (2019) show how the Article 6 mechanisms 
under the Paris Agreement could generate financial incentives for 
HFC mitigation and related energy efficiency improvements. Early 
action under Article 6  of the Paris Agreement could drive down 
baseline levels of HFCs for developing countries (calculated in 
light of future production and consumption in the early- and mid-
2020s) thus generating long-term mitigation benefits under the 
Kigali Amendment (Hoch et al. 2019). However, achievement of the 
objectives of the Kigali Amendment is dependent on its ratification 
by key developed countries, such as the United States, and the 
provision of funds by developed countries through the Protocol’s 
Multilateral Fund to meet developing countries’ agreed incremental 
costs of implementation (Roberts 2017). The Kigali Amendment came 
into force on 1 January 2019 and has been ratified by 118 of the 198 
Parties to the Montreal Protocol. 
MEAs dealing with transboundary air pollution, such as the 
Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) 
and its implementing protocols, which regulate non-GHGs like 
particulates, nitrogen oxides and ground-level ozone, can also have 
potential benefits for climate change mitigation (Erickson 2017). 
Studies have indicated that rigorous air quality controls targeting 
short-lived climate forcers, like methane, ozone and black carbon, 
could slow global mean temperature rise by about 0.5°C by mid-
century (Schmale et al. 2014). Steps in this direction were taken with 

adopted in 1999) to include black carbon, which is an important 
driver of climate change in the Arctic region (Yamineva and Kulovesi 
2018). The amended Protocol, which has 28 Parties including the US 
and EU, entered into force in October 2019. However, its limits on 
black carbon have been criticised as insufficiently ambitious in light of 
scientific assessments (Khan and Kulovesi 2018). There is still a non-
negligible uncertainty in the assessment of radiative forcing of each 
short-lived climate forcer (SLCF), and the results of AR6 WGI have 
been updated since AR5. For example, the assessment of Emission-
based Radiative Forcing from Black Carbon emissions was revised 
downward in AR6 (AR6 WGI Section  6.4.2). When discussing co-
benefits with MEAs related to transboundary air pollution, attention 
should be paid to the uncertainty in radiative forcing of SLCFs and 
the update of relevant scientific knowledge.
mitigation is the 2013 Minamata Convention on Mercury, which 
came into force on 16 August 2017. Coal burning for electricity 
generation represents the second largest source (behind artisanal 
and small-scale gold mining) of anthropogenic mercury emissions to 
air (UNEP 2013). Efforts to control and reduce atmospheric emissions 
of mercury from coal-fired power generation under the Minamata 
Convention may reduce GHG emissions from this source (Eriksen 
and Perrez 2014; Selin 2014). For instance, Giang et al. (2015) have 
modelled the implications of the Minamata Convention for mercury 
emissions from coal-fired power generation in India and China, 
concluding that reducing mercury emissions from present-day levels 
in these countries is likely to require ‘avoiding coal consumption and 
transitioning toward less carbon-intensive energy sources’ (Giang 
et al. 2015). Parties to the Minamata Convention include five of the 
six top global CO 2 emitters – China, the United States, the EU, India 
and Japan (Russia has not ratified the Convention). The Minamata 
Convention also establishes an Implementation and Compliance 
Committee to review compliance with its provisions on a ‘facilitative’ 
basis (Eriksen and Perrez 2014). 
MEAs that require state Parties to conserve habitat (such as the 
Convention on Biological Diversity) or to protect certain ecosystems like 
wetlands (such as the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International 
Importance Especially as Waterfowl Habitat) may also have co-benefits 
for climate change mitigation through the adoption of well-planned 
conservation policies (Phelps et al. 2012; Gilroy et al. 2014). At 
a theoretical level, REDD+ activities have been identified as a particular 
opportunity for achieving climate mitigation objectives while also 
conserving tropical forest biodiversity and ecosystem services. Elements 
of REDD+ that promise greatest effectiveness for climate change 
mitigation (e.g., greater finance combined with reference levels which 
reduce leakage by promoting broad participation across countries with 
both high and low historical deforestation rates) also offer the greatest 
benefits for biodiversity conservation (Busch et al. 2011). However, 
actual biodiversity and ecosystem service co-benefits are dependent 
on the design and  implementation of REDD+ programmes (Ehara 
et al. 2014; Panfil and Harvey 2016), with limited empirical evidence 
to date of emissions reductions from these programmes (Newton et al. 
2016; Johnson et al. 2019), and concerns about whether they meet 
equity and justice considerations (Schroeder and McDermott 2014) 
(Section 7.6.1). 
14.5.1.2 Linkages with Sustainable Development, Adaptation, 
Loss and Damage, and Human Rights
As discussed in Chapter  1, the emerging framing for the issue of 
climate mitigation is that it is no longer to be considered in isolation 
but rather in the context of its linkages with other areas. Adaptation, 
loss and damage, human rights and sustainable development are 
all areas where there are clear or potential overlaps, synergies, and 
conflicts with the cooperation underway in relation to mitigation.
The IPCC defines adaptation as: ‘in human systems, the process of 
adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects, in order to 
moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In natural systems, 
the process of adjustment to actual climate and its effect; human intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its 
effects’ (Annex I: Glossary).
Adaptation involves actions to lessen the harm associated with 
climate change, or take advantage of potential gains (Smit and 
Wandel 2006). It can seek to reduce present and future exposure 
to specific climate risks (Adger et al. 2003), mainstream climate 
information into existing planning efforts (Gupta et al. 2010; van der 
Voorn et al. 2012; van der Voorn et al. 2017), and reduce vulnerability 
(or increase resilience) of people or communities to the effects of 
climate change (Kasperson and Kasperson 2001). There is a  body 
of literature highlighting potential synergies and conflicts between 
adaptation actions – in any of the three areas above – and mitigation 
actions –  and potential strategies for resolving them (Locatelli 
et al. 2011; Casado-Asensio and Steurer 2014; Duguma et al. 2014; 
Suckall et al. 2015; Watkiss et al. 2015; van der Voorn et al. 2020). 
In a strategic context, this issue has been analysed in Bayramoglu 
et al. (2018), Eisenack and Kähler (2016) and Ingham et al. (2013), 
among others. Bayramoglu et al. (2018) analyse the strategic 
interaction between mitigation, as a  public good, and adaptation, 
essentially a  private good, showing that the fear that adaptation 
will reduce the incentives to mitigate carbon emissions may not be 
justified. On the contrary, adaptation can reduce free-rider incentives 
(lead to larger self-enforcing agreements), yielding higher global 
mitigation levels and welfare, if adaptation efforts cause mitigation 
levels between different countries to be complements instead of 
strategic substitutes (Ingham et al. 2013). 
Distinct from project or programmatic level activities, however, 
international cooperation for adaptation operates to provide finance 
and technical assistance (Bouwer and Aerts 2006). In most cases it 
involves transboundary actions, such as in the case of transboundary 
watershed management (Wilder et al. 2010; Milman et al. 2013; 
van der Voorn et al. 2017). In others it involves the mainstreaming 
of climate change projections into existing treaties, such as for the 
protection of migratory species (Trouwborst et al. 2012). 
International cooperation in mitigation and adaptation share many 
of the same challenges, including the need for effective institutions. 
The UNFCCC, for example, addresses international financial support 
for adaptation and for mitigation in the same general category, and 
subjects them to the same sets of institutional constraints (Peterson 
and Skovgaard 2019). Sovacool and Linnér (2016) argue that the history 
of the UNFCCC and its sub-agreements has been shaped by an implicit 
bargain that developing countries participate in global mitigation policy 
in return for receiving financial and technical assistance for adaptation 
and development from industrialised countries and international 
green funds. Khan and Roberts (2013) contend that this played out 
poorly under the Kyoto framework: the Protocol’s basic architecture, 
oriented around legally binding commitments, was not amenable to 
merging the issues of adaptation and mitigation. Kuyper et al. Kuyper 
et al. (2018a) argue that the movement from the Kyoto Protocol to the 
Paris Agreement represents a shift in this regard; the Paris Agreement 
was designed not primarily as a  mitigation policy instrument, but 
rather one encompassing mitigation, adaptation, and development 
concerns. While this argument suggests that the Paris architecture, 
involving voluntary mitigation actions and a greater attention to issues 
adaptation support into meaningful mitigation actions, there are 
only few papers that examine this issue. Stua (2017a,b) explores the 
relevance of the so-called ‘share of proceeds’ included in Article 6 of 
the Paris Agreement as a key tool for leveraging adaptation though 
mitigation actions.
There are recognised limits to adaptation (Dow et al. 2013), and 
exceeding these limits results in loss and damage, a  topic that 
is gathering salience in the policy discourse. Roberts et al. (2014) 
focused on ‘loss and damage’, essentially those climate change 
impacts which cannot be avoided through adaptation. The Paris 
Agreement contains a  free-standing article on loss and damage 
(UNFCCC 2015a), focused on cooperation and facilitation, under 
which Parties have established a clearing house on risk transfer, and 
a Task Force on Displacement (UNFCCC 2016a). The COP decision 
accompanying the Paris Agreement specifies that ‘Article 8  does 
not involve or provide a  basis for any liability or compensation’ 
(UNFCCC 2016a). There is range of views on the treatment of loss 
and damage in the Paris Agreement, how responsibility for loss and 
damage should be allocated (Lees 2017; McNamara and Jackson 
2019), and how it could be financed (Roberts et al. 2017; Gewirtzman 
et al. 2018). Some scholars argue that there are continuing options 
to pursue compensation and liability in the climate change regime 
(Mace and Verheyen 2016; Gsottbauer et al. 2018). There have also 
been efforts to establish accountability of companies – particularly 
‘carbon majors’ – for climate damage in domestic courts (Ganguly 
et al. 2018; Benjamin 2021). For states that have suffered loss and 
damage there is also the option to pursue ‘state responsibility’ claims 
under customary international law and international human rights 
law (Wewerinke-Singh 2018; Wewerinke-Singh and Salili 2020).
One scholar argues that climate impacts are ‘incremental violence 
structurally over-determined by international relations of power and 
control’ that affect most those who have contributed the least to 
GHG emissions (Dehm 2020). Calls for compensation or reparation 
for loss and damage are therefore a  demand for climate justice 
(Dehm 2020). Many small island states entered declarations on 
acceptance of the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement that they continue 
to have rights under international law regarding state responsibility 
for the adverse effects of climate change, and that no provision in 
these treaties can be interpreted as derogating from any claims or 
rights concerning compensation and liability due to the adverse 
effects of climate change.
The adoption in 2013 of the Warsaw International Mechanism on 
Loss and Damage as part of the UNFCCC occurred despite the historic 
opposition of the United States to this policy. Vanhala and Hestbaek 
(2016) examine the roles of ‘frame contestation’ (contestations 
over different framings of loss and damage, whether as ‘liability 
and compensation’ or ‘risk management and insurance’ or other) and 
ambiguity in accounting for the evolution and institutionalisation 
of the loss and damage norm within the UNFCCC. However, there 
is little international agreement on the scope of loss and damage 
programmes, and especially how they would be funded and by 
whom (Gewirtzman et al. 2018). Moreover, non-economic loss and 
damage (NELD) forms a  distinct theme that refers to the climate-related losses of items both material and non-material that are not 
commonly traded in the market, but whose loss is still experienced 
as such by those affected. Examples of NELD include loss of cultural 
identity, sacred places, human health and lives (Serdeczny 2019). The 
Santiago Network is part of the Warsaw International Mechanism, to 
catalyse the technical assistance of relevant organisations, bodies, 
networks and experts, for the implementation of relevant approaches 
to avert, minimise and address loss and damage at the local, national 
and regional levels, in developing countries that are particularly 
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change (UNFCCC 2020c). 
There are direct links between climate mitigation efforts, adaptation 
and loss and damage –  the higher the collective mitigation 
ambition and the likelihood of achieving it, the lower the scale of 
adaptation ultimately needed and the lower the scale of loss and 
damage anticipated. The liability of states, either individually or 
collectively, for loss and damage is contested, and no litigation has 
yet been successfully launched to pursue such claims. The science 
of attribution, however, is developing (Otto et al. 2017; Skeie et al. 
2017; Marjanac and Patton 2018; Patton 2021) and while it has 
the potential to address the thorny issue of causation, and thus 
compensation (Stuart-Smith et al. 2021), it could also be used to 
develop strategies for climate resilience (James et al. 2014). 
There are also direct links between mitigation and sustainable 
development. The international agendas for mitigation and 
sustainable development have shaped each other, around concepts 
such as ‘common but differentiated responsibilities and respective 
capabilities’, as well as the distinction – in the UNFCCC and later the 
Kyoto Protocol – between Annex I and non-Annex I countries (Victor 
2011; Patt 2015). The same implicit bargain that developing countries 
would support mitigation efforts in return for assistance with respect 
to adaptation also applies to support for development (Sovacool 
and Linnér 2016). That linkage between mitigation and sustainable 
development has become even more specific with the Paris Agreement 
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, each of which 
explicitly pursues a set of goals that encompass both mitigation and 
development (Schmieg et al. 2017), reflecting the recognition that 
achieving sustainable development and climate mitigation goals are 
mutually dependent (Gomez-Echeverri 2018). It is well accepted that 
the long-term effects of climate mitigation will benefit sustainable 
development. A  more contested finding is whether the mitigation 
actions themselves promote or hinder short-term poverty alleviation. 
One study, analysing the economic effects of developing countries’ 
NDCs, finds that mitigation actions slow down poverty reduction 
efforts (Campagnolo and Davide 2019). Other studies suggest 
possible synergies between low-carbon development and economic 
development (Hanger et al. 2016; Labordena et al. 2017; Dzebo 
et al. 2019). These studies typically converge on the fact that financial 
assistance flowing from developed to developing countries enhances 
any possible synergies or lessens the conflicts. However, mitigation 
measures can also have negative impacts on gender equality, and 
peace and justice (Dzebo et al. 2019). The International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) has also taken on board the climate challenge and is 
examining the role of fiscal and macroeconomic policies to address 
the climate challenge for supporting its members with appropriate 
policy responses.
level, related to the importance of addressing climate change and 
development in an integrated, coordinated and comprehensive 
manner across constituencies, sectors and administrative and 
geographical boundaries (Le Blanc 2015). The literature also stresses 
the important role that robust institutions have in making this 
happen, including in international cooperation in key sectors for 
climate action as well for development (Waage et al. 2015). Since 
the publication of AR5, which emphasised the need for a  type of 
development that combines both mitigation and adaptation as a way 
to strengthen resilience, much of the literature has focused on ways 
to address these linkages and the role institutions play in key sectors 
that are often the subject of international cooperation – for example, 
environmental and soil degradation, climate, energy, water resources, 
and forestry (Hogl et al. 2016). An assessment of thematic policy 
coherence between the voluntary domestic contributions regarding 
the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda should be integrated in 
national policy cycles for sustainable and climate policymaking to 
identify overlaps, gaps, mutual benefits and trade-offs in national 
policies (Janetschek et al. 2020). 
It is only since 2008 that the relationship between climate change 
and human rights has become a  focus of international law and 
policymaking. It is not just climate impacts that threaten the 
enjoyment of human rights but also the mitigation responses to 
climate change that affect human rights (Shi et al. 2017). The issue of 
human rights–climate change linkages was first taken up by the UN 
Human Rights Council in 2008, but has since rapidly gained ground 
with UN human rights treaty bodies issuing comments (e.g., Human 
Rights Committee 2018), recommendations (e.g.,  Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women 2018) and even a joint 
statement (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 2019) 
on the impacts of climate change on the enjoyment of human rights. 
Climate change effects and related disasters have the potential to 
affect human rights broadly, for instance, by giving rise to deaths, 
disease or malnutrition (right to life, right to health), threatening food 
security or livelihoods (right to food), impacting upon water supplies 
and compromising access to safe drinking water (right to  water), 
destroying coastal settlements through storm surge (right to adequate 
housing), and in some cases forcing relocation as traditional territories 
become uninhabitable (UNGA 2019). In addition, the right to a healthy 
environment, recognised in 2021 as an autonomous right at the 
international level by the Human Rights Council (UN Human Rights 
Council 2021), arguably extends to a right to a ‘safe climate’ shaped in 
part by the Paris Agreement (UNGA 2019).
As the intersections between climate impacts and human rights have 
become increasingly clear, litigants have begun to use human rights 
arguments, with a growing receptivity among courts towards such 
arguments in climate change cases (Peel and Osofsky 2018; Savaresi 
and Auz 2019; Macchi and van Zeben 2021). In the landmark 
Urgenda climate case in 2019, the Dutch Supreme Court interpreted 
the European Convention on Human Rights in light of customary 
international law and the UN climate change regime and ordered 
the state to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25% by 2020 
compared to 1990 (The Supreme Court of the Netherlands 2019). In  the Neubauer case in 2021, the German Federal Constitutional 
Court ordered the German legislature, in light of its obligations, 
including on rights protections, to set clear provisions for reduction 
targets from 2031 onward by the end of 2022 (German Constitutional 
Court 2021). There are cases in the Global South as well (Peel and Lin 
2019; Setzer and Benjamin 2020), with the Supreme Court in Nepal 
in its 2018 decision in Shrestha ordering the government to amend 
its existing laws and introduce a new consolidated law to address 
climate mitigation and adaptation as this would protect the rights to 
life, food, and a clean environment, and give effect to the 2015 Paris 
Agreement (The Supreme Court of Nepal 2018). There are dozens of 
further cases in national and regional courts, increasingly based on 
human rights claims, and this trend is only likely to grow (Shi et al. 
2017; Peel and Osofsky 2018; Beauregard et al. 2021). These cases 
face procedural hurdles, such as standing, as well as substantive 
difficulties, for instance, with regard to the primarily territorial 
scope of state obligations to protect human rights (Boyle 2018; 
Mayer 2021), however, there are increasing instances of successful 
outcomes across the world.
14.5.1.3 Trade Agreements
As discussed in AR5, policies to open up trade can have a range of 
effects on GHG emissions, just as mitigation policies can influence 
trade flows among countries. Trade rules may impede mitigation 
action by limiting countries’ discretion in adopting trade-related 
climate policies, but they also have the potential to stimulate the 
international adoption and diffusion of mitigation technologies and 
policies (Droege et al. 2017).
The mitigation impacts of trade agreements are difficult to ascertain, 
and the limited evidence is mixed. Examining the effects of three 
free trade agreements (FTAs) – Mercosur, the North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Australia–United States Free Trade 
Agreement – on GHG emissions, Nemati et al. (2019) find that these 
effects depend on the relative income levels of the countries involved, 
and that FTAs between developed and developing countries may 
increase emissions in the long run. However, studies also suggest 
that FTAs incorporating specific environmental or climate-related 
provisions can help reduce GHG emissions (Baghdadi et al. 2013; 
Sorgho and Tharakan 2020).
Investment agreements, which are often integrated in FTAs, seek 
to encourage the flow of foreign investment through investment 
protection. While international investment agreements hold potential 
to increase low-carbon investment in host countries (PAGE 2018), 
these agreements have tended to protect investor rights, constraining 
the latitude of host countries in adopting environmental policies 
(Miles 2019). Moreover, international investment agreements may 
lead to ‘regulatory chill’, which may lead to countries refraining 
from or delaying the adoption of mitigation policies, such as phasing 
out fossil fuels (Tienhaara 2018). More contemporary investment 
agreements seek to better balance the rights and obligations of 
investors and host countries, and in theory offer greater regulatory 
space to host countries (UNCTAD 2019), although it is unclear to 
what extent this will hold true in practice.
measures, including import bans, standards and labelling schemes, 
border carbon adjustments (BCAs; see also Chapter 13), renewable 
energy support measures, fossil fuel subsidy reform, and the use 
of international market mechanisms (Brandi 2017). Some of these 
‘response measures’ (Chan 2016b) may raise questions concerning 
their consistency with trade agreements of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). Non-discrimination is one of the foundational 
rules of the WTO. This means, among others, that ‘like’ imported and 
domestic products are not treated differently (‘national treatment’) 
and that a  WTO member should not discriminate between other 
members (‘most-favoured-nation treatment’). These principles are 
elaborated in a set of agreements on the trade in goods and services, 
including the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the 
General Agreement on Trade in Services(GATS), the Agreement on 
Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), and the Agreement on Subsidies 
and Countervailing Measures (ASCM).Several measures that can be adopted as part of carbon pricing 
instruments to address carbon leakage concerns have been examined 
in the light of WTO rules. For instance, depending on the specific 
design, the free allocation of emissions allowances under an ETS could 
be considered a subsidy inconsistent with the ASCM (Rubini and Jegou 
2012; Ismer et al. 2021). The WTO compatibility of another measure 
to counter carbon leakage, BCAs, has also been widely discussed 
(Box  14.2). Alternatives to BCAs, such as consumption charges on 
carbon-intensive materials (Pollitt et al. 2020), can be consistent with 
WTO law, as they do not involve discrimination between domestic 
and  foreign products based on their carbon intensity (Ismer and 
Neuhoff 2007; Tamiotti 2011; Pauwelyn 2013; Holzer 2014; Ismer 
and Haussner 2016; Cosbey et al. 2019; European Commission 2019; 
Mehling et al. 2019; Porterfield 2019; Ismer et al. 2020).
Box 14.2 | Border Carbon Adjustments and International Climate and Trade Cooperation
Analyses of the WTO compatibility of BCAs (Ismer and Neuhoff 2007; Tamiotti 2011; Hillman 2013; Pauwelyn 2013; Holzer 2014; 
Trachtman 2017; Cosbey et al. 2019; Mehling et al. 2019; Porterfield 2019) gained new currency following the legislative proposal to 
introduce a ‘carbon border adjustment mechanism’ in the EU (European Commission 2021). BCAs can in principle be designed and 
implemented in accordance with international trade law, but the details matter (Tamiotti et al. 2009). To increase the likelihood that 
a BCA will be compatible with international trade law, studies suggest that it would need to: have a clear environmental rationale 
(i.e., reduce carbon leakage); apply to imports and exclude exports; consider the actual carbon intensity of foreign producers; account 
for the mitigation efforts by other countries; and provide for fairness and due process in its design and implementation (Pauwelyn 
2013; Trachtman 2017; Cosbey et al. 2019; Mehling et al. 2019).
BCAs may also raise concerns regarding their consistency with international climate change agreements (Hertel 2011; Davidson Ladly 
2012; Ravikumar 2020). To mitigate these concerns, BCAs could include special provisions (e.g., exemptions) for LDCs, or channel 
revenues from the BCA to developing countries to support low-carbon and climate-resilient development (Grubb 2011; Springmann 
2013; Mehling et al. 2019). Moreover, international dialogue on principles and best practices guiding BCAs could help to ensure that 
such measures do not hinder international cooperation on climate change and trade (Bernasconi-Osterwalder and Cosbey 2021). 
Other regulatory measures may also target the GHG emissions 
associated with the production of goods (Dobson 2018). These 
measures include bans on carbon-intensive materials, emissions 
standards for the production process of imported goods, and 
carbon footprint labels (Kloeckner 2012; Holzer and Lim 2020; 
Gerres et al. 2021). The compatibility of such measures with trade 
agreements remains subject to debate. While non-discriminatory 
measures targeting the emissions from a  product itself (e.g.,  fuel 
efficiency standards for cars) are more likely to be allowed than 
measures targeting the production process of a good (Green 2005), 
some studies suggest that differentiation between products based 
on their production process may be compatible with WTO rules 
(Benoit 2011; McAusland and Najjar 2015). (Mayr et al. 2020) find 
that sustainability standards targeting the emissions from indirect 
land use change associated with the production of biofuels may be 
inconsistent with the TBT Agreement. Importantly, trade rules express 
a strong preference for the international harmonisation of standards 
over unilateral measures (Delimatsis 2016).Renewable energy support measures may be at odds with the ASCM, 
the GATT, and the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment 
Measures. In WTO disputes, measures adopted in Canada, India, and 
the United States to support clean energy generation were found to 
be inconsistent with WTO law due to the use of discriminatory local 
content requirements, such as the requirement to use domestically 
produced goods in the production of renewable energy (Cosbey and 
Mavroidis 2014; Kulovesi 2014; Lewis 2014; Wu and Salzman 2014; 
Charnovitz and Fischer 2015; Shadikhodjaev 2015; Espa and Marín 
Durán 2018).
Some measures may both lower trade barriers and potentially bring 
about GHG emissions reductions. An example is the liberalisation of 
trade in environmental goods (Hu et al. 2020). In 2012, the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation economies agreed to reduce tariffs for 
a list of 54 environmental goods (including, for example, solar cells; 
but excluding, for example, biofuels or batteries for electric vehicles). 
However, negotiations on an Environmental Goods Agreement under 
goods to include (de Melo and Solleder 2020). Another example is 
fossil fuel subsidy reform, which may reduce GHG emissions (Jewell 
et al. 2018; Chepeliev and van der Mensbrugghe 2020; Erickson et al. 
2020) and lower trade distortions (Burniaux et al. 2011; Moerenhout 
and Irschlinger 2020). However, fossil fuel subsidies have largely 
remained unchallenged before the WTO due to legal and political 
hurdles (Asmelash 2015; De Bièvre et al. 2017; Meyer 2017; Steenblik 
et al. 2018; Verkuijl et al. 2019).
With limited progress in the multilateral trading system, some studies 
suggest that regional FTAs hold potential for strengthening climate 
governance. In some cases, climate-related provisions in such FTAs 
can go beyond provisions in the Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement, 
addressing for instance cooperation on carbon markets or electric 
vehicles (Gehring et al. 2013; van Asselt 2017; Morin and Jinnah 2018; 
Gehring and Morison 2020). However, Morin and Jinnah (2018) find 
that these provisions are at times vaguely formulated, not subject 
to third-party dispute settlement, and without sanctions or remedy 
in case of violations. Moreover, such provisions are not widely used 
in FTAs, and they are not adopted by the largest GHG emitters. 
For instance, the 2019 United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement, 
NAFTA’s successor, does not include any specific provisions on climate 
change, although it could implement cooperative mitigation actions 
through its Commission for Environmental Cooperation (Laurens 
et al. 2019).
A trend in international economic governance has been the adoption 
of ‘mega-regional’ trade agreements involving nations responsible 
for a substantial share of world trade, such as the Comprehensive 
and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), the 
EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), 
and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in 
East Asia. Given the size of the markets covered by these agreements, 
they hold potential to diffuse climate mitigation standards (Meltzer 
2013; Holzer and Cottier 2015). While CETA includes climate-
related provisions and Parties have made a  broad commitment to 
implement the Paris Agreement (Laurens et al. 2019), and the CPTPP 
includes provisions promoting cooperation on clean energy and low-
emissions technologies, the RCEP does not include specific provisions 
on climate change.
Studies have discussed various options to minimise conflicts, and 
strengthen the role of trade agreements in climate action, although 
the mitigation benefits and distributional effects of these options 
have yet to be assessed. Some options require multilateral action, 
including: (i) the amendment of WTO agreements to accommodate 
climate action; (ii) the adoption of a ‘climate waiver’ that temporarily 
relieves WTO members from their obligations; (iii) a ‘peace clause’ 
through which members commit to refraining from challenging 
each other’s measures; (iv) an ‘authoritative interpretation’ by WTO 
members of ambiguous WTO provisions; (v) improved transparency 
of the climate impacts of trade measures; (vi) the inclusion of 
climate expertise in WTO disputes; and (vii) intensified institutional 
coordination between the WTO and UNFCCC (Hufbauer et al. 2009; 
Epps and Green 2010; Bacchus 2016; Droege et al. 2017; Das et al. 
2019). In addition, issue-specific suggestions have been put forward, such as reinstating an exception for environmentally-motivated 
subsidies under the ASCM (Horlick and Clarke 2017).
Options can also be pursued at the plurilateral and regional levels. 
Several studies suggest that climate clubs (Section  14.2.2) could 
employ trade measures, such as lower tariffs for climate-related 
goods and services, or BCAs, to attract club members (Nordhaus 
2015; Brewer et al. 2016; Keohane et al. 2017; Stua 2017a; Banks 
and Fitzgerald 2020). Another option is to negotiate a  new 
agreement addressing both climate change and trade. Negotiations 
between six countries (Costa Rica, Fiji, Iceland, New Zealand, 
Norway, Switzerland) were launched in 2019 on a new Agreement 
on Climate Change, Trade and Sustainability (ACCTS), which, if 
successfully concluded, would liberalise trade in environmental 
goods and services, create new rules to remove fossil fuel subsidies, 
and develop guidelines for voluntary eco-labels (Steenblik and 
Droege 2019). At the regional level, countries could further opt for 
the inclusion of climate provisions in the (re)negotiation of FTAs 
(Morin and Jinnah 2018; Yamaguchi 2020). Moreover, the conduct 
of climate impact assessments of FTAs could help identify options 
to achieve both climate and trade objectives (Porterfield et al. 2017). 
In their assessment of the feasibility of various options for reform, 
Das et al. (2019) find that the near-term feasibility of options that 
require consensus at the multilateral level (notably amendments of 
WTO agreements) is low. By contrast, options involving a  smaller 
number of Parties, as well as options that can be implemented by 
WTO members on a voluntary basis, face fewer constraints.
For international investment agreements, various other suggestions 
have been put forward to accommodate climate change concerns. 
These include incorporating climate change through ongoing reform 
processes, such as reform of investor-state dispute settlement under 
the UN Commission on International Trade Law; modernisation 
of the Energy Charter Treaty; the (re)negotiation of international 
investment agreements; and the adoption of a  specific treaty to 
promote investment in climate action (Brauch et al. 2019; Tienhaara 
and Cotula 2020; Yamaguchi 2020; Cima 2021).
14.5.1.4 South-South cooperation
South-South cooperation (SSC) and triangular cooperation (TrC) are 
bold, innovative, and rapidly developing means of strengthening 
cooperation for the achievement of the SDGs (FAO 2018). SSC is 
gaining momentum in achieving sustainable development and 
climate actions in developing countries (UN 2017b). Through SSC, 
countries are able to map their capacity needs and knowledge gaps 
and find sustainable, cost-effective, long-lasting and economically 
viable solutions (FAO 2019). In the UN Climate Change Engagement 
Strategy 2017 (UNOSSC 2017), South-South Cooperation Action Plan 
is identified as a substantive pillar to support.
In 2019, the role of South-South and triangular cooperation was 
further highlighted with the BAPA+40 Outcome document (UN 
2019), noting outstanding contributions to alleviating global 
inequality, promoting sustainable development and climate actions, 
promoting gender equality and enriching multilateral mechanisms. 
Furthermore, the role of triangular cooperation was explicitly 
the implementation of the SDGs (UN 2019).
There has been a recent resurgence of South-South cooperation (Gray 
and Gills 2016). The South-South Cooperation Action Plan was adopted 
by the UN as a  substantive pillar to support the implementation of 
the UN Climate Change Engagement Strategy 2017 (UNOSSC 2017). 
Liu et al. (2017a) explored prospects for South–South cooperation for 
large-scale ecological restoration, which is an important solution to 
mitigate climate change. Emphasis is given to experience and expertise 
sharing, co-financing, and co-development of new knowledge and 
know-how for more effective policy and practice worldwide, especially 
in developing and newly industrialised countries.
Janus et al. (2014) explore evolving development cooperation and 
its future governance architecture based on The Global Partnership 
for Effective Development Cooperation and The United Nations 
Development Cooperation Forum. Drawing on evidence from the 
hydropower, solar and wind energy industry in China, Urban (2018) 
introduces the concept of ‘geographies of technology transfer and 
cooperation’ and challenges the North–South technology transfer 
and cooperation paradigm for low-carbon innovation and climate 
change mitigation. While North–South technology transfer and 
cooperation (NSTT) for low-carbon energy technology has been 
implemented for decades, South–South technology transfer and 
cooperation (SSTT) and South–North technology transfer and 
cooperation (SNTT) have only recently emerged. Kirchherr and Urban 
(2018) provide a meta-synthesis of the scholarly writings on NSTT, 
SSTT and SNTT from the past 30 years. The discussion focuses on 
core drivers and inhibitors of technology transfer and cooperation, 
outcomes as well as outcome determinants. A case study of transfer 
of low-carbon energy innovation and its opportunities and barriers, 
based on the first large Chinese-funded and Chinese-built dam in 
Cambodia is presented by Hensengerth (2017). 
Hensengerth (2017) explores the role that technology transfer/
cooperation from Europe played in shaping firm-level wind energy 
technologies in China and India and discusses the recent technology 
cooperation between the Chinese, Indian, and European wind firms. 
The research finds that firm-level technology transfer/cooperation 
shaped the leading wind energy technologies in China and to a lesser 
extent in India. Thus, the technology cooperation between China, India, 
and Europe has become multi-faceted and increasingly Southern-led.
Rampa et al. (2012) focus on the manner in which African states 
understand and approach new opportunities for cooperation with 
emerging powers, especially China, India and Brazil, including the 
crucial issue of whether they seek joint development initiatives with 
both traditional partners and emerging powers. UN (2018) presents 
and analyses case studies of SSTT in Asia and Pacific and Latin 
America and Caribbean regions. Illustrative case studies on TrC can 
be consulted in Shimoda and Nakazawa (2012), and specific cases on 
biofuel SSC and TrC in UNCTAD (2012).
The central argument in the majority of these case studies is that 
South–South cooperation, which is value-neutral, is contributing 
to sustainable development and capacity building (Rampa et al. 2012; Shimoda and Nakazawa 2012; UN 2018). An important new 
development in SSC is that in relation to some technologies the 
cooperation is increasingly led by Southern countries (for instance, 
wind energy between Europe, India and China), challenging the 
classical North–South technology cooperation paradigm. More 
broadly, Parties should ensure the sustainability of cooperation, 
rather than focusing on short-term goals (Eyben 2013). The Belt and 
Road Initiative (BRI) is a classic example of a recent SSC initiative 
led by China. According to a joint study by Tsinghua University and 
Vivid Economics, the 126 countries in the BRI region, excluding 
China, currently account for about 28% of global GHG emissions, but 
this proportion may increase to around 66% by 2050 if the carbon 
intensity of these economies only decreases slowly (according to 
historical patterns shown by developing countries). In this context 
it is important to highlight that China has already outlined a vision 
for a  green BRI, and recently increased its commitment through 
the Green Investment Principles initiative, announcing a  new 
international coalition to improve sustainability and promote green 
infrastructure (Jun and Zadek 2019).
Information on triangular cooperation is more readily available than 
on South–South cooperation though some UN organisations such 
as UNDP and FAO have established platforms for the latter which 
also include climate projects. Further, although there are many 
South–South cooperation initiatives involving the development 
and transfer of climate technologies, the understanding of the 
motivations, approaches and designs is limited and not easily 
accessible. There is no dedicated platform for South–South and 
triangular cooperation on climate technologies. Hence, it is still too 
early to fully assess the achievements in the field of climate action 
(UNFCCC and UNOSSC 2018). In order to maximise its unique 
contribution to Agenda 2030, Southern providers recognise the 
benefits of measuring and monitoring South–South cooperation, 
and there is a  clear demand for better information from partner 
countries. Di Ciommo (2017) argues that ‘better data could support 
monitoring and evaluation, improve effectiveness, explore synergies 
with other resources, and ensure accountability’ to a  diverse set 
of stakeholders. Besharati et al. (2017) present a  framework of 

policymakers can use to access the quality and effectiveness of SSC 
and its contribution to sustainable development.
The global landscape of development cooperation has changed 
dramatically in recent years, with countries of the South engaging 
in collaborative learning models to share innovative, adaptable and 
cost-efficient solutions to their development and socio-economic-
environmental challenges, ranging from poverty and education 
to climate change. The proliferation of new actors and cross-
regional modalities has enriched the understanding and practice of 
development cooperation and generated important changes in the 
global development architecture towards a more inclusive, effective, 
and horizontal development agenda. South–South cooperation 
will grow in the future, while it is complimentary to North–South 
cooperation. However, there are knowledge gaps in relation to the 
precise volume, impact, effectiveness and quality of development 
cooperation from emerging development partners. This gap needs to 
be plugged, and evidence on such cooperation strengthened.
and Institutions
Sectors refer to distinct areas of economic activity, often subject to 
their own governance regimes; examples include energy production, 
mobility, and manufacturing. A  sectoral agreement could include 
virtually any type of commitment with implications for mitigation. 
It could establish sectoral emission targets, on either an absolute or 
an indexed basis. It could also require states (or particular groups 
of states, if commitments are differentiated) to adopt uniform or 
harmonised policies and measures for a sector, such as technology-
based standards, taxes, or best-practice standards, as well as 
providing for cooperation on technology research or deployment.
14.5.2.1 Forestry, Land Use and REDD+
Since 2008, several, often overlapping, voluntary and non-binding 
international efforts and agreements have been adopted to reduce 
net emissions from the forestry sector. These initiatives have varying 
levels of private sector involvement and different objectives, 
targets, and timelines. Some efforts focus on reducing emissions 
from deforestation and degradation, while other focus on the 
enhancement of sinks through restoration of cleared or degraded 
landscapes. These initiatives do not elaborate specific policies, 
procedures, or implementation mechanisms. They set targets, 
frameworks, and milestones, aiming to catalyse further action, 
investment, and transparency in conservation and consolidate 
individual country efforts.
After the UN-sponsored Tropical Forestry Action Plan (Winterbottom 
1990; Seymour and Busch 2016), among the longest standing 
programmes in the forestry sector are the World Bank-sponsored 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility in 2007, which helps facilitate 
funding for REDD+ readiness and specific projects, in addition to 
preparing countries for results-based payments and future carbon 
markets while securing local communities’ benefits managed sub-
nationally, and the UN REDD+ Programme initiated in 2008, which 
aims to reduce forest emissions and enhance carbon stocks in 
forests while contributing to national sustainable development in 
developing countries, after the 2007 COP13 in Bali formally adopted 
REDD+ in the UNFCCC decisions and incorporated it in the Bali 
Plan of Action. As discussed above, Article 5 of the Paris Agreement 
encourages Parties to take action to implement and support REDD+. 
These efforts tend to focus on reducing emissions through the 
creation of protected areas, payments for ecosystem services, and/
or land tenure reform (Pirard et al. 2019). The UNREDD+ programme 
supports national REDD+ efforts, inclusion of stakeholders in 
relevant dialogues, and capacity building toward REDD+ readiness 
in partner countries. To date the conservation and emissions 
impacts of REDD+ remain misunderstood (Pirard et al. 2019), but 
while existing evidence suggests that reductions in deforestation 
from sub-national REDD+ initiatives have been limited (Bos et al. 
2017) it shows an increasing prominence (Maguire et al. 2021). 
Additionally, the Green Climate Fund has carried out results-based 
payments within REDD+. Eight countries have so far received 
significant funding (GCF 2021). The shift in the REDD+ focus from 
ecosystem service payment to domestic policy realignments and incentive structure has changed the way REDD+ was developed and 
implemented (Brockhaus et al. 2017). Large-scale market resources 
have not fully materialised as a global carbon market system that 
explicitly integrates REDD+ remains under development (Angelsen 
2017). Public funding for REDD+ is also limited (Climate Focus 2017). 
Leading up to the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the governments 
of Germany, Norway, and the United Kingdom formed a partnership 
in 2014 called ‘GNU’ to support results-based financing for REDD+, 
with Norway emerging as one of, if not the single largest, major 
donor for REDD+ through its pledge in 2007 of approximately USD3 
billion annually. Norway pledged USD1 billion for Brazil in 2008 and 
the same for Indonesia in 2010 (Schroeder et al. 2020). Meanwhile, 
REDD+ Early Movers was established with support from Germany, 
and the Central African Forest Initiative, a collaborative partnership 
between the European Union, Germany, Norway, France, and the 
United Kingdom was also set up. It supports six central African 
countries in fighting deforestation.
More recently, the Lowering Emissions by Accelerating Forest Finance 
(LEAF) Coalition was established, consisting of the governments of 
Norway, the UK, and the USA and initially nine companies, to accelerate 
REDD+ with a jurisdictional approach. LEAF uses the Architecture for 
REDD+ Transactions (ART)’s The REDD+ Environmental Excellence 
Standard (TREES), coordinated by Emergent, a non-profit intermediary 
between tropical countries and the private sector. Three jurisdictions 
in Brazil and two countries have already submitted concept notes 
to ART to receive results-based payments. REDD+ initiatives with 
a jurisdictional approach have also been adopted in various markets, 
such as the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International 
Aviation (CORSIA) (Maguire 2021). In addition to Brazil, Indonesia has 
attracted significant interest as a host country for REDD+. Indonesia 
ranks second, after Brazil, as the largest producer of deforestation-
related GHG emissions (Zarin et al. 2016), but it has committed 
to a  large reduction of deforestation in its NDC (Government of 
Indonesia 2016). Australia has collaborated on scientific research 
and emissions reduction monitoring (Tacconi 2017). It took a while, 
however, before emissions reductions were witnessed (Meehan et al. 
2019). The expansion of commodity plantations, however, conflict 
with reduction ambitions (Anderson et al. 2016; Irawan et al. 2019) In 
addition to implementation at the site and jurisdictional levels, legal 
enforcement (Tacconi et al. 2019) as well as policy and regulatory 
reforms (Ekawati et al. 2019) appear to be needed.
Another relevant initiative is one under the 2015 United Nations 
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), which targets land 
degradation neutrality, that is, ‘a state whereby the amount and 
quality of land resources, necessary to support ecosystem functions 
and services and enhance food security, remains stable or increases 
within specified temporal and spatial scales and ecosystems’ (Orr 
et al. 2017). This overarching goal was recognised as also being 
critical to reaching the more specific avoided deforestation and 
degradation and restoration goals of the UNFCCC and UNCBD. The 
Land Degradation Neutrality (LDN) initiative from UNCCD includes 
target-setting programmes that assist countries by providing 
practical tools and guidance for the establishment of the voluntary 
targets and to formulate associated measures to achieve LDN 
and accelerate implementation of projects (Chasek et al. 2019). 
(UNCCD 2015). The LDN Fund is an investment vehicle launched in 
UNCCD COP 13 in 2017, which exists to provide long-term financing 
for private projects and programmes for countries to achieve their 
LDN targets. According to the UNCCD, most of the funds will be 
invested in developing countries. 
Recent efforts towards the enhancement of sinks from the forestry 
sector have the overarching goal of reaching zero gross deforestation 
globally, that is, eliminating the clearing of all natural forests. The 
New York Declaration on Forests (NYDF) was the first international 
pledge to call for a halving of natural forest loss by 2020 and the 
complete elimination of natural forest loss by 2030 (Climate Focus 
2016). It was endorsed at the United Nations Climate Summit in 
September 2014.  By September 2019  the list of NYDF supporters 
included over 200  actors: national  governments, sub-national 
governments, multi-national companies, groups representing 
indigenous communities, and non-government organisations. These 
endorsers committed to doing their part to achieve the NYDF’s ten 
goals, which included ending deforestation for agricultural expansion 
by 2020, reducing deforestation from other sectors, restoring forests, 
and providing financing for forest action (Forest Declaration 2019). 
These goals are assessed and tracked through the NYDF Progress 
Assessment, which includes NYDF Assessment Partners that collect 
data, generate analysis, and release the finding based on the NYDF 
framework and goals. 
The effectiveness of these agreements, which lack binding rules, can 
only be judged by the supplementary actions they have catalysed. 
The NYDF contributed to the development of several other zero-
deforestation pledges, including the Amsterdam Declarations by seven 
European nations to achieve fully sustainable and deforestation-free 
agro-commodity supply chains in Europe by 2020 and over 150 
individual company commitments to not source products associated 
with deforestation (Donofrio et al. 2017; Lambin et al. 2018). Recent 
studies indicate that these efforts currently lack the potential to 
achieve wide-scale reductions in clearing and associated emissions 
due to weak implementation (Garrett et al. 2019), although in some 
cases in Indonesia and elsewhere the commodity supply chain 
sustainability drive appears to contribute to lowering deforestation 
(Wijaya et al. 2019; Chain Reaction Research 2020; Schulte et al. 
2020). The NYDF may have triggered small additional reductions 
in deforestation in some areas, particularly for soy, and to a lesser 
extent cattle, in the Brazilian Amazon (Lambin et al. 2018), but these 
effects were temporary, as efforts are being actively reversed and 
deforestation has increased again significantly. Deforestation rates 
have escalated in Brazil, with the rate in June 2019 (the first dry-
season month in the new administration) up 88% over the 2018 rate 
in the same month (INPE 2019). Curtis et al. (2018) find global targets 
are clearly not being met. More recent increase in the deforestation 
rate remains to be assessed. NYDF confirms that the initiative did not 
reach its zero-deforestation goal (NYDF Assessment Partners 2020).
In 2010, the Parties to the CBD adopted the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 which included 20 targets known as the 
Aichi Biodiversity targets (Marques et al. 2014). Of relevance to the 
forestry sector, Aichi Target 15 sets the goal of enhancing ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks 
though conservation and restoration, including ‘restoration of at least 
15% of degraded ecosystems’ (UNCBD 2010). The plan elaborates 
milestones, including the development of national plans for potential 
restoration levels and contributions to biodiversity protection, carbon 
sequestration, and climate adaptation to be integrated into other 
national strategies, including REDD+. In 2020, however, the CBD 
found that while progress was evident for the majority of the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets, it was not sufficient for the achievement of the 
targets by 2020 (CBD 2020).
Recent efforts toward negative emissions through restoration 
include the Bonn Challenge, the African Forest Landscape 
Restoration Initiative (AFR100) and Initiative 20x20. The Bonn 
Challenge, initiated in 2011 by the Government of Germany and 
the International Union for Conservation of Nature, is intended to 
catalyse the existing international AFOLU commitments. It aimed 
to bring 150 million hectares (Mha) of the world’s deforested and 
degraded land into restoration by 2020, and 350 Mha by 2030. AFR 
has the goal of restoring 100 Mha specifically in Africa (AUDA-NEPAD 
2019), while 20x20 aims to restore 20 Mha in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (Anderson and Peimbert 2019). Increasing commitments 
for restoration have created momentum for restoration interventions 
(Chazdon et al. 2017; Mansourian et al. 2017; Djenontin et al. 2018). 
To date 97 Mha has been pledged in NDCs. Yet only a small part of this 
goal has been achieved. The Bonn Challenge Barometer – a progress-
tracking framework and tool to support pledgers –  indicates that 

1.379 GtCO2-eq sequestered (Dave et al. 2019). A key challenge in 
scaling up restoration has been to mobilise sufficient financing (Liagre 
et al. 2015; Djenontin et al. 2018). This underscores the importance 
of building international financing for restoration (equivalent to the 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility focused on avoided deforestation 
and degradation).
In sum, existing international agreements have had a small impact 
on reducing emissions from the AFOLU sector and some success in 
achieving the enhancement of sinks through restoration. However, 
these outcomes are nowhere near levels required to meet the Paris 
Agreement temperature goal –  which would require turning land 
use and forests globally from a  net anthropogenic source during 
1990–2010 to a net sink of carbon by 2030, and providing a quarter 
of emissions reductions planned by countries (Grassi et al. 2017). The 
AFOLU sector has so far contributed only modestly to net mitigation 
(Chapter 7).
14.5.2.2 Energy Sector
International cooperation on issues of energy supply and security has 
a long and complicated history. There exists a plethora of institutions, 
organisations, and agreements concerned with managing the sector. 
There have been efforts to map the relevant actors, with authors 
in one case identifying six primary organisations (Kérébel and 
Keppler 2009), in another 16 (Lesage et al. 2010), and in a  third 

history has had climate mitigation as its core focus. Global energy 
governance has encompassed five broad goals – security of energy 
environmental sustainability, and domestic good governance – and 
as only one of these provides an entry point for climate mitigation, 
effort in this direction has often been lost (van de Graaf and 
Colgan 2016). To take one example, during the 1980s and 1990s 
a  combination of bilateral development support and lending 
practices from multilateral development banks pushed developing 
countries to adopt power market reforms consistent with the 
Washington Consensus: towards liberalised power markets and away 
from state-owned monopolies. The goals of these reforms did not 
include an environmental component, and among the results was 
new investment in fossil-fired thermal power generation (Foster and 
Rana 2020).
As Goldthau and Witte (2010) document, the majority of governance 
efforts, outside of oil and gas producing states, was oriented towards 
ensuring reliable and affordable access for oil and gas imports. For 
example, the original rationale for the creation of the International 
Energy Agency (IEA), during the oil crisis of 1973–74, was to manage 
a  mechanism to ensure importing countries’ access to oil (van de 
Graaf and Lesage 2009). On the other side of the aisle, oil exporting 
countries created the international institution OPEC to enable them 
to influence oil output, thereby stabilising prices and revenues for 
exporting countries (Fattouh and Mahadeva 2013). For years, energy 
governance was seen as a  zero-sum game between these poles 
(Goldthau and Witte 2010). The only international governance agency 
focusing on low-carbon energy sources was the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, with a dual mission of promoting nuclear energy and 
nuclear weapons non-proliferation (Scheinman 1987).
More recently, however, new institutions have emerged, and existing 
institutions have realigned their missions, in order to promote capacity 
building and global investment in low-carbon energy technologies. 
Collectively, these developments may support the emergence of 
a  nascent field of global sustainable energy governance, in which 
a  broad range of global, regional, national, sub-national and non-
state actors, in aggregate, shape, direct and implement the low 
carbon transition through climate change mitigation activities, which 
produce concomitant societal benefits (Bruce 2018). Beginning in the 
1990s, for example, the IEA began to broaden its mission from one 
concerned primarily with security of oil supplies, which encompassed 
conservation of energy resources, to one also concerned with the 
sustainability of energy use, including work programmes on energy 
efficiency and clean energy technologies and scenarios (van de Graaf 
and Lesage 2009). Scholars have suggested that it was the widespread 
perception that the IEA was primarily interested in promoting the 
continued use of fossil fuels, and underplaying the potential role of 
renewable technologies, that led a  number of IEA member states 
to successfully push for the creation of a parallel organisation, the 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), which was then 
established in 2009 (van de Graaf 2013). An assessment of IRENA’s 
activities in 2015 suggested that the agency has a  positive effect 
related to three core activities: offering advisory services to member 
states regarding renewable energy technologies and systems; serving 
as a  focal point for data and analysis for renewable energy; and, 
mobilising other international institutions, such as multilateral 
development banks, promoting renewable energy (Urpelainen and Van de Graaf 2015). The United Nations, including its various agencies 
such as the Committee on Sustainable Energy within the United 
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, has also played a  role 
in the realignment of global energy governance towards mitigation 
efforts. As a precursor to SDG 7, the United Nations initiated in 2011 
the Sustainable Energy for All initiative, which in addition to aiming 
for universal access to modern energy services, included the goals of 
doubling the rate of improvement in energy efficiency, and doubling 
by 2030 the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix 
(Bruce 2018).
Sub-global agreements have also started to emerge, examples of 
issue-specific climate clubs. In 2015, 70 solar-rich countries signed 
a framework agreement dedicated towards promoting solar energy 
development (ISA 2015). In 2017 the Powering Past Coal Alliance was 
formed, uniting a  set of states, businesses, and non-governmental 
organisations around the goal of eliminating coal-fired power 
generation by 2050 (Jewell et al. 2019; Blondeel et al. 2020). Scholars 
have argued that greater attention to supply-side agreements such 
as this – focusing on reducing and ultimately eliminating the supply 
of carbon-intensive energy sources – would strengthen the UNFCCC 
and Paris Agreement (Collier and Venables 2014; Piggot et al. 2018; 
Asheim et al. 2019; Newell and Simms 2020). Chapter 6 of this report, 
on energy systems, notes the importance of regional cooperation on 
electric grid development, seen as necessary to enable higher shares 
of solar and wind power penetration (RGI 2011). Finally, a number 
of transnational organisations and activities have emerged, such as 
REN21, a  global community of renewable energy experts (REN21 
2019), and RE100, an NGO-led initiative to enlist multilateral 
companies to shift towards 100% renewable energy in their value 
chains (RE100 2019).
Whether a  result of the above activities or not, multilateral 
development banks’ lending practices have shifted in the direction 
of renewable energy (Delina 2017), a point also raised in Chapter 15 
of this report. Activities include new sources of project finance, 
concessional loans, as well as loan guarantees, the latter through the 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency 2019). This appears to matter. For example, Frisari 
and Stadelmann (2015) find concessional lending by multilateral 
development banks to solar energy projects in Morocco and India to 
have reduced overall project costs, due to more attractive financing 
conditions from additional lenders, as well as reducing the costs 
to local governments. Labordena et al. (2017) projected these 
results into the future, and found that with the drop in financing 
costs, renewable energy projects serving all major demand centres 
in sub-Saharan Africa could reach cost parity with fossil fuels by 
2025, whereas without the drop in financing costs associated with 
concessional lending, this would not be the case. Similarly, Creutzig 
et al. (2017) suggest that greater international attention to finance 
could be instrumental in the full development of solar energy.
Despite improvements in the international governance of energy, it 
still appears that a great deal of this is still concerned with promoting 
further development of fossil fuels. One aspect of this is the 
development of international legal norms. A large number of bilateral 
and multilateral agreements, including the 1994 Energy Charter 
settlement (ISDS) designed to protect the interests of investors in 
energy projects from national policies that could lead their assets to 
be stranded. Numerous scholars have pointed to ISDS being able to 
be used by fossil-fuel companies to block national legislation aimed 
at phasing out the use of their assets (Tienhaara 2018; Bos and Gupta 
2019). Another aspect is finance; Gallagher et al. (2018) examine the 
role of national development finance systems. While there has been 
a great deal of finance devoted to renewable energy, they find the 
majority of finance devoted to projects associated either with fossil 
fuel extraction or with fossil fuel-fired power generation. 
Given the complexity of global energy governance, it is impossible 
to make a  definitive statement about its overall contribution to 
mitigation efforts. Three statements, do however, appear to be 
robust. First, prior to the emergence of climate change on the global 
political agenda, international cooperation in the area of energy 
was primarily aimed at expanding and protecting the use of fossil 
energy, and these goals were entrenched in a number of multilateral 
organisations. Second, since the 1990s, international cooperation 
has gradually taken climate mitigation on board as one of its goals, 
seeing a realignment of many pre-existing organisations priorities, 
and the formation of a number of new international arrangements 
oriented towards the development of renewable energy resources. 
Third, the realignment is far from complete, and there are still 
examples of international cooperation having a  chilling effect on 
climate mitigation, particularly through financing and investment 
practices, including legal norms designed to protect the interests of 
owners of fossil assets. 
14.5.2.3 Transportation
The transportation sector has been a particular focus of cooperative 
efforts on climate mitigation that extend beyond the sphere of the 
UNFCCC climate regime. A  number of these cooperative efforts 
involve transnational public-private partnerships, such as the 
European-based Transport Decarbonisation Alliance, which brings 
together countries, regions, cities and companies working towards 
the goal of a ‘net-zero emission mobility system before 2050’ (TDA 
2019). Other efforts are centred in specialised UN agencies, such 
as the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the 
International Maritime Organization (IMO). 
Measures introduced by the ICAO and IMO have addressed CO 2 
emissions from international shipping and aviation. Emissions from 
these parts of the transportation sector are generally excluded 
from national emissions reduction policies and NDCs because the 
‘international’ location of emissions release makes allocation to 
individual nations difficult (Bows-Larkin 2015; Lyle 2018; Hoch et al. 
2019). The measures adopted by ICAO take the form of standards and 
recommended practices that are adopted in national legislation. IMO 
publishes ‘regulations’ but does not have a power of enforcement, 
with non-compliance a responsibility of flag states that issue a ship’s 
‘MARPOL’ certificate.
As discussed in Chapter 2 and Figure SPM.4, international aviation 
currently accounts for approximately 1% of global GHG  emissions, with international shipping contributing 1.2% of global GHG  
emissions. These international transport emissions are projected 
to be between approximately 60% and 220% of global emissions 
of CO 2 in 2050, as represented by the four main illustrative model 
pathways in SR1.5 (Rogelj et al. 2018; UNEP 2020) Notably, however, 
the climate impact of aviation emissions is estimated to be two to 
four times higher due to non-CO 2 effects (Terrenoire et al. 2019; Lee 
et al. 2021a). Increases in trans-Arctic shipping and tourism activities 
with sea ice loss are also forecast to have strong regional effects due 
to ships’ gas and particulate emissions (Stephenson et al. 2018). 
The Kyoto Protocol required Annex I  Parties to pursue emissions 
reductions from aviation and marine bunker fuels by working through 
IMO and ICAO (UNFCCC 1997, Art. 2.2). Limited progress was made 
by these organisations on emissions controls in the ensuing decades 
(Liu 2011b), but greater action was prompted by conclusion of the 
SDGs and Paris Agreement (Martinez Romera 2016), together with 
unilateral action, such as the EU’s inclusion of aviation emissions in 
its Emissions Trading System (Dobson 2020). 
The Paris Agreement neither explicitly addresses emissions from 
international aviation and shipping, nor repeats the Kyoto Protocol’s 
provision requiring Parties to work through ICAO/IMO to address 
these emissions (Hoch et al. 2019). This leaves unclear the status of 
the Kyoto Protocol’s Article 2.2 directive after 2020 (Martinez Romera 
2016; Dobson 2020), potentially opening up scope for more attention 
to aviation and shipping emissions under the Paris Agreement 
(Doelle and Chircop 2019). Some commentators have suggested that 
emissions from international aviation and shipping should be part of 
the Paris Agreement (Gençsü and Hino 2015; Traut et al. 2018), and 
shipping and aviation industries themselves may prefer emissions to 
be treated under an international regime rather than a nationally-
oriented one (Gilbert and Bows 2012). In the case of shipping 
emissions, there is nothing in the Paris Agreement to prevent a Party 
from including international shipping in some form in its NDC (Doelle 
and Chircop 2019) Under the Paris Rulebook, Parties ‘should report 
international aviation and marine bunker fuel emissions as two 
separate entries and should not include such emissions in national 
totals but report them distinctly, if disaggregated data are available’ 
(UNFCCC 2019d). 
ICAO has an overarching climate goal to ‘limit or reduce the impact 
of aviation greenhouse gas emissions on the global climate’ with 
respect to international aviation. In order to achieve this, ICAO has 
two global aspirational goals for the international aviation sector, of 
2% annual fuel efficiency improvement through 2050 and carbon 
neutral growth from 2020 onwards (ICAO 2016). In order to achieve 
these global aspirational goals, ICAO is pursuing a  ‘basket’ of 
mitigation measures for the aviation sector consisting of technical 
and operational measures, such as a  CO 2 emissions standard for 
new aircraft adopted in 2016, measures on sustainable alternative 
fuels and a market-based measure, known as the Carbon Offset and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA), which the 
triennial ICAO Assembly of 193 Member States resolved to establish 
in 2016 (ICAO 2016). In line with the 2016 ICAO Assembly Resolution 
that established CORSIA, in mid-2018, the ICAO’s 36-member state 
governing Council adopted a series of Standards and Recommended 
Chicago Convention (1944), as a  common basis for CORSIA’s 
implementation and enforcement by each state and its aeroplane 
operators. From 1  January 2019, the CORSIA SARPs require states 
and their operators to undertake an annual process of monitoring, 
verification, and reporting of emissions from all international flights, 
including to establish CORSIA’s emissions baseline (ICAO 2019). 
Based on this emissions data, CORSIA’s carbon offsetting obligations 
commenced in 2021, with three-year compliance cycles, including 
a pilot phase in 2021–2023. States have the option to participate 
in the pilot phase and the subsequent voluntary three-year cycle in 
2024–2026. CORSIA becomes mandatory from 2027 onwards for 
states whose share in the total international revenue tonnes per 
kilometre is above a  certain threshold (Hoch et al. 2019). Under 
CORSIA, aviation CO 2 emissions are not capped, but rather emissions 
that exceed the CORSIA baseline are compensated through use of 
‘offset units’ from emissions reduction projects in other industries 
(Erling 2018). However, it is unclear whether the goal of carbon 
neutral growth and further CO 2 emissions reduction in the sector 
will be sufficiently incentivised solely through the use of such offsets 
in combination with ICAO’s manufacturing standards, programmes, 
and state action plans, without additional measures being taken, 
for example, constraints on demand (Lyle 2018). If countries such 
as China, Brazil, India and Russia do not participate in CORSIA’s 
voluntary offsetting requirements this could significantly undermine 
its capacity to deliver fully on the sectoral goal by limiting coverage 
of the scheme to less than 50% of international aviation CO 2 
emissions in the period 2021–2026 (Hoch et al. 2019; Climate Action 
Tracker 2020b). In addition, a  wide range of offsets are approved 
as ‘eligible emissions units’ in CORSIA, including several certified 
under voluntary carbon offset schemes, which may go beyond those 
eventually agreed under the Paris Agreement Article 6  mechanism 
(Hoch et al. 2019). It is noted, however, that ICAO applies a set of 
‘Emissions Unit Eligibility Criteria’, agreed in March 2019, which 
specify required design elements for eligible programmes. In June 
2020, the ICAO Council decided to define 2019 emissions levels, 
rather than an average of 2019 and 2020 emissions, as the baseline 
year for at least the first three years of CORSIA, although there were 
significant reductions (45–60%) in aviation CO 2 emissions in 2020 
compared with 2019 as a result of reductions in air travel associated 
with the COVID-19 pandemic (Climate Action Tracker 2020b).
Other measures adopted by ICAO include an aircraft CO 2 emissions 
standard that applies to new aircraft type designs from 2020, and 
to aircraft type designs already in production as of 2023 (Smith 
and Ahmad 2018). Overall, CORSIA and regional measures, such 
as the EU ETS, are estimated to reduce aviation carbon emissions 
by only 0.8% per year from 2017–2030 (noting, however, that ‘if 
non-CO 2 emissions are included in the analysis, then emissions will 
increase’) (Larsson et al. 2019). Accordingly, pathways consistent 
with the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement are likely to 
require more stringent international measures for the aviation sector 
(Larsson et al. 2019). 
Similar to ICAO, the IMO has a stated vision of remaining committed 
to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from international shipping and, as a  matter of urgency, aims to phase them out as soon as 
possible in this century. IMO has considered a range of measures to 
monitor and reduce shipping emissions. In 2016, the IMO’s Marine 
Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) approved an amendment 
to the MARPOL Convention Annex VI for the introduction of 
a mandatory global data collection scheme for fuel oil consumption 
of ships (Dobson 2020). Other IMO measures have focused on 
energy efficiency (Martinez Romera 2016). The IMO’s Energy 
Efficiency Design Index (EEDI), which is mandatory for new ships, 
is intended, over a ten-year period, to improve energy efficiency by 
up to 30% in several categories of ships propelled by diesel engines 
(Smith and Ahmad 2018). In May 2019, the MEPC approved draft 
amendments to the MARPOL Convention Annex VI, which if adopted, 
will bring forward the entry into force of the third phase of the EEDI 
requirements to 2022 instead of 2025 (IMO 2019; Joung et al. 2020). 
However, it is unlikely that the EEDI and other IMO technical and 
operational measures will be sufficient to produce ‘the necessary 
emissions reduction because of the future growth in international 
seaborne trade and world population’ (Shi and Gullett 2018). 
Consequently, in 2018, the IMO adopted an initial strategy on 
reduction of GHG emissions from ships (IMO 2018). This includes 
a goal for declining carbon intensity of the sector by reducing CO 2 
emissions per transport work, as an average across international 
shipping, by at least 40% by 2030, and pursuing efforts towards 
70% by 2050, compared to 2008 levels (IMO 2018, Para. 3.1). The 
strategy also aims for peaking of total annual GHG emissions from 
international shipping as soon as possible and a  reduction by at 
least 50% by 2050 compared to 2008 levels, while pursuing efforts 
towards phasing them out ‘as soon as possible in this century’ as 
a point ‘on a pathway of CO 2 emissions reduction consistent with 
the Paris Agreement temperature goals’ (IMO 2018, Para. 2, 3.1). The 
shipping industry is on track to overachieve the 2030 carbon intensity 
target but not its 2050 target (Climate Action Tracker 2020c). The 
initial IMO strategy is to be kept under review by the MEPC with 
a view to adoption of a revised strategy in 2023. 
The IMO’s initial strategy identifies a series of candidate short-term 
(2018–2023), medium-term (2023–2030) and long-term (beyond 
2030) measures for achieving its emissions reduction goals, including 
possible market-based measures in the medium-to-long term (IMO 
2018, paras. 4.7–4.9). Further progress on market-based measures 
faces difficulty in light of conflicts between the CBDRRC principle of 
the climate regime and the traditional non-discrimination approach 
and principle of no more favourable treatment enshrined in MARPOL 
and other IMO conventions (Zhang 2016). Both the CBDRRC and non-
discrimination principles are designated as ‘principles guiding the 
initial strategy’ (IMO 2018, Para. 3.2). The challenges encountered 
in introducing global market-based measures for shipping emissions 
under the IMO have prompted regional initiatives such as the 
proposed extension of the EU ETS to emissions from maritime 
activities (Christodoulou et al. 2021), which was announced on 

package (European Commission 2021).
While the IMO strategy is viewed as a reasonable first step that is 
ambitious for the shipping industry, achieving the ‘vision’ of alignment 
implementation measures and strengthened targets in the next 
iteration in 2023 (Doelle and Chircop 2019; Climate Action Tracker 
2020c). As a step towards this, in 2020, the IMO’s MEPC put forward 
draft amendments to the MARPOL Convention that would require 
ships to combine a technical and an operational approach to reduce 
their carbon intensity. These amendments were formally adopted by 
the Committee at its session in June 2021.
14.5.3 Civil Society and Social Movements
Transnationally organised civil society actors have had long-standing 
involvement in international climate policy, with a particular focus 
on consulting or knowledge-sharing where they are present in 
transnational climate governance initiatives (Michaelowa and 
Michaelowa 2017). The term ‘civil society’ generally denotes ‘the 
voluntary association of individuals in the public sphere beyond the 
realms of the state, the market and the family’ (de Bakker et al. 2013, 
p. 575). Whereas civil society organisations are usually involved in 
lobbying or advocacy activities in a public arena, social movements 
focus on mobilisation and action for social change (Daniel and 
Neubert 2019). Examples of civil society groups involved in 
international climate policy include non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) such as Greenpeace International, the World Wide Fund 
for Nature, the Environmental Defense Fund, the World Resources 
Institute, Friends of the Earth and Earthjustice among many others, 
as well as NGO networks such as the Climate Action Network, which 
has over 1300 NGO members in more than 130 countries, working 
to promote government and individual action to limit human-
induced climate change to ecologically sustainable levels (Climate 
Action Network International 2020). The influence of civil society 
engagement in global climate governance is well acknowledged, 
with these organisations’ globally dispersed constituencies and non-
state status offering perspectives that differ in significant ways from 
those of many negotiating states (Derman 2014). 
Historically, the issue of climate change did not give rise to intense, 
organised transnational protest characteristic of social movements 
(McAdam 2017). During the 1990s and early 2000s, the activities 
of the global climate movement were concentrated in developed 
countries and largely sought to exercise influence through 
participation in UNFCCC COPs and side events (Almeida 2019). The 
mid-2000s onwards, however, saw the beginnings of use of more 
non-institutionalised tactics, such as simultaneous demonstrations 
across several countries, focusing on a  grassroots call for climate 
justice that grew out of previous environmental justice movements 
(Almeida 2019). Groups representing indigenous peoples, youth, 
women, and labour rights brought to the fore new tools of contention 
and new issues in the UNFCCC, such as questions of a just transition 
and gender equity (Allan 2020). 
Climate justice has been variously defined, but centres on addressing 
the disproportionate impacts of climate change on the most vulnerable 
populations and calls for community sovereignty and functioning 
(Schlosberg and Collins 2014; Tramel 2016). Contemporary climate 
justice groups mobilise multiple strands of environmental justice movements from the Global North and South, as well as from distinct 
indigenous rights and peasant rights movements, and are organised 
as a  decentralised network of semiautonomous, coordinated units 
(Claeys and Delgado Pugley 2017; Tormos-Aponte and García-López 
2018). The climate justice movement held global days of protest 
in most of the world’s countries in 2014 and 2015, and mobilised 
another large campaign in 2018 (Almeida 2019). The polycentric 
arrangement of the global climate movement allows simultaneous 
influence on multiple sites of climate governance, from the local to 
the global levels (Tormos-Aponte and García-López 2018). 
Prominent examples of new climate social movements that operate 
transnationally are Extinction Rebellion and Fridays for Future, 
which collectively held hundreds of coordinated protests across the 
globe in 2019–2021, marking out ‘the transnational climate justice 
movement as one of the most extensive social movements on the 
planet’ (Almeida 2019). Fridays for Future is a children’s and youth 
movement that began in August 2018, inspired by the actions of 
then 15-year old Greta Thunberg who pledged to strike in front of the 
Swedish parliament every Friday to protest against a lack of action 
on climate change in line with the Paris Agreement targets (Fridays 
for Future 2019). Fridays for Future events worldwide encompass 
more than 200 countries and millions of strikers. The movement is 
unusual for its focus on children and the rights of future generations, 
with children’s resistance having received little previous attention 
in the literature. Fridays for Future is regarded as a  progressive 
resistance movement that has quickly achieved global prominence 
(for example, Thunberg was invited to address governments at the 
UN Climate Summit in New York in September 2019) and is credited 
with helping to support the discourse about the responsibility of 
humanity as a  whole for climate change (Holmberg and Alvinius 
2019). Whereas Fridays for Future has focused on periodic protest 
action, Extinction Rebellion has pursued a  campaign based on 
sustained non-violent direct citizen action that is focused on three 
key demands: declaration of a ‘climate emergency’, acting now to halt 
biodiversity loss and reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 
2025, and creation of a citizen’s assembly on climate and ecological 
justice (Booth 2019; Extinction Rebellion 2019). The movement first 
arose in the United Kingdom– where it claimed credit for adoption 
of a climate emergency declaration by the UK government – but now 
has a presence in 45 countries with some 650 groups having formed 
globally (Gunningham 2019).
The Paris Agreement’s preamble explicitly recognises the importance 
of engaging ‘various actors’ in addressing climate change, and 
the decision adopting the Agreement created the Non-state Actor 
Zone for Climate Action platform to aid in scaling up these efforts. 
Specific initiatives have also been taken to facilitate participation 
of particular groups, such as the UNFCCC’s Local Communities and 
Indigenous Peoples Platform, which commenced work in Katowice 
in 2019. Climate movements based in the Global South, as well 
as in indigenous territories, are playing an increasingly important 
role in transnational negotiations through networks such as the 
Indigenous Peoples Platform. These groups highlight the voices 
and perspectives of communities and peoples particularly affected 
by climate change. For instance, the Pacific Climate Warriors is 
a grassroots network of young people from various countries in the 
of future inevitability of their Pacific homelands disappearing, and 
re-envisioning islanders as warriors defending rights to homeland 
and culture (McNamara and Farbotko 2017). Youth global climate 
activism, particularly involving young indigenous climate activists, is 
another notable recent development. Although there remains little 
published literature on indigenous youth climate activism (MacKay 
et al. 2020), analysis of online sources indicates the emergence of 
several such groups, including the Pacific Climate Warriors and Te Ara 
Whatu from Aotearoa New Zealand (Ritchie 2021), as well as Seed 
Mob in Australia. 
Transnational civil society organisations advocating for climate 
justice in global governance have articulated policy positions around 
rights protections, responsibility-based approaches to climate 
finance, and the need for transparency and accountability (Derman 
2014). Another recent area of activity, which overlaps with that of 
emerging investor alliances (Section 14.5.4), is the sustainability of 
capital investment in fossil fuel assets. Efforts to shift away from 
fossil fuels led by civil society include the Beyond Coal Campaign 
(in the USA and Europe) and the organisation for a Fossil Fuel Non-
proliferation Treaty. 350.org has supported mobilisation of youth 
and university students around a campaign of divestment that has 
grown into a  global movement (Gunningham 2019). As Mormann 
(2020) notes, as of November 2020 ‘more than 1,200 institutional 
investors managing over USD14 trillion of assets around the world 
have committed to divest some or all of their fossil fuel holdings’. 
Studies suggest that the direct impacts of the divestment movement 
have so far been small, given a  failure to differentiate between 
different types of fossil fuel companies, a lack of engagement with 
retail investors, and a lack of guidance for investors on clean energy 
re-investment (Osofsky et al. 2019; Mormann 2020). The movement 
has had a more significant impact on public discourse by raising the 
profile of climate change as a financial risk for investors (Bergman 
2018). Blondeel et al. (2019) also find that broader appeal of the 
divestment norm was achieved when moral arguments were linked 
to financial ones, through the advocacy of economic actors, such as 
the Bank of England’s governor.
Climate justice campaigns by transnational civil society organisations 
increasingly embrace action through the courts. Chapter 13 discusses 
the growth and policy impact of such ‘climate litigation’ brought by 
civil society actors in domestic courts, which is attracting increasing 
attention in the literature (Setzer and Vanhala 2019; Peel and Osofsky 
2020). Transnational and international court actions focused on 
climate change, by contrast, have been relatively few in number (Peel 
and Lin 2019). This reflects – at least in part – the procedural hurdles 
to bringing such claims, as in many international courts and tribunals 
(outside of the area of human rights or investor–state arbitration) 
litigation can only be brought by states (Bruce 2017). However, there 
have been active discussions about seeking an advisory opinion 
from the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on states’ international 
obligations regarding the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions 
(Sands 2016; Wewerinke-Singh and Salili 2020), or bringing a case to 
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on marine pollution 
harms caused by climate change (Boyle 2019). In September 2021 the 
Government of Vanuatu announced a campaign to seek an advisory opinion from the ICJ. The aim of climate litigation more generally is 
to supplement other regulatory efforts by filling gaps and ensuring 
that interpretations of laws and policies are aligned with climate 
mitigation goals (Osofsky 2010).
The overall impact of transnationally-organised civil society action 
and social movements for international cooperation on climate 
change mitigation has not been comprehensively evaluated in 
the literature. This may reflect the polycentric organisation of the 
movement, which poses challenges for coordinating between groups 
operating in different contexts, acting with different strategies and 
around multiple issues, and lobbying multiple decision-making 
bodies at various levels of government in a sustainable way (Tormos-
Aponte and García-López 2018). There is some literature emerging 
on environmental defenders and their need for protection against 
violence and repression, particularly in the case of indigenous 
environmental defenders who face significantly higher rates of violence 
(Scheidel et al. 2020). Scheidel et al. (2020) also find that combining 
strategies of preventive mobilisation, protest diversification and 
litigation can enhance rates of success for environmental defenders 
in halting environmentally destructive projects. In the area of climate 
litigation, commentators have noted the potential for activists and 
even researchers to suffer retaliation through the courts as a result of 
‘strategic lawsuits against public participation’ and lawsuits against 
researchers brought by fossil fuel interests (Setzer and Byrnes 2019; 
Setzer and Benjamin 2020). Influence of social movements may be 
enhanced through taking advantage of ‘movement spillover’ (the 
involvement of activists in more than one movement) (Hadden 2014) 
and coordination of activities with a range of ‘non-state governors’, 
including cities, sub-national governments, and investor groups 
(Gunningham 2019). Studies of general societal change suggest that 
once 3.5% of the population are mobilised on an issue, far-reaching 
change becomes possible (Gladwell 2002; Chenoweth and Belgioioso 
2019) – a tipping point that may be approaching in the case of climate 
change (Gunningham 2019). As noted in Chapter 5, in the particular 
case of low-carbon technologies, ‘if 10–30% of the population were 
to demonstrate commitment to low-carbon technologies, behaviours, 
and lifestyles, new social norms would be established’. 
14.5.4 Transnational Business and Public-Private 
Partnerships and Initiatives
Combined national climate commitments fall far short of the Paris 
Agreement’s long-term temperature goals. Similar political ambition 
gaps persist across various areas of sustainable development. Many 
therefore argue that actions by non-state actors, such as businesses 
and investors, cities and regions, and NGOs, are crucial. However, non-
state climate and sustainability actions may not be self-reinforcing 
but may heavily depend on supporting mechanisms. Governance 
risk-reduction strategies can be combined to maximize non-state 
potential in sustainable and climate-resilient transformations (Chan 
et al. 2019). 
An important feature of the evolving international climate policy 
landscape of recent years is the entrepreneurship of UN agencies 
such as UNEP and UNDP , as well as international organisations such 
Andonova (2017) calls this ‘governance entrepreneurship’. Such 
partnerships can be defined as ‘voluntary agreements between 
public actors (international organisations, states, or sub-state public 
authorities) and non-state actors (non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs), companies, foundations, etc.) on a  set of governance 
objectives and norms, rules, practices, and/or implementation 
procedures and their attainment across multiple jurisdictions and 
levels of governance’ (Andonova 2017). Partnerships may carry 
out different main functions: first, policy development, establishing 
new agreements on norms, rules, or standards among a broader set 
of governmental and non-governmental actors; second, enabling 
implementation and delivery of services, by combining resources from 
governmental and non-governmental actors; and, third, knowledge 
production and dissemination, to for example, the evolution of 
relevant public policies. 
An example of a  prominent PPP in the area of climate mitigation 
is the Renewable Energy Network (REN21 2019), which is a global 
multi-stakeholder network focused on promoting renewable energy 
policies in support of the transition to renewable energy through 
knowledge, established in 2004. It includes members from industry, 
NGOs, intergovernmental organisations, and science and academia. 
Another example is the Green Economy Coalition founded in 2009 
to bring to bear the perspectives of workers, business, poor people, 
the environment community, and academics in the transition to 
a greener and more sustainable economy. Another example is that in 
2015, Peru, in collaboration with France and the UNFCCC Secretariat, 
launched the Non-state Actor Zone for Climate Action, an online 
platform to showcase commitments to climate action by companies, 
cities, regions and investors (Chan et al. 2016; Bertoldi et al. 2018). 
More recently, the UNFCCC Race to Zero initiative led by High-level 
Climate Champions Nigel Topping and Gonzalo Muñoz seeks to 
mobilise actors beyond national governments to join the Climate 
Ambition Alliance and pursue net zero CO 2 targets. Its membership 
includes 454 cities, 23 regions, 1391 businesses, 74 of the biggest 
investors, and 569 universities.
PPPs may also be developed to assist with implementation and 
support of states’ climate mitigation commitments. For instance, 
UNEP has initiated a  number of PPPs for climate change finance. 
These are designed to increase financing for the purposes of 
disseminating low-carbon technologies to tackle climate change and 
promote clean energy in many parts of developing countries (UNEP 
2018b; Charlery and Traerup 2019). 
In the same vein, in 2010 FAO delivered the Framework for Assessing 
and Monitoring Forest Governance. The Framework draws on several 
approaches currently in use or under development in major forest 
governance-related processes and initiatives, including the World 
Bank’s Framework for Forest Governance Reform. The Framework 
builds on the understanding that governance is both the context 
and the product of the interaction of a  range of actors and 
stakeholders with diverse interests (FAO 2010). For example, UNFCCC 
and the UN-REDD programme focus on REDD+ and UNEP focuses on 
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB), institutional 
mechanisms that have been conceptualised as a ‘win-win-win’ for mitigating climate, protecting biodiversity and conserving indigenous 
culture by institutionalising payments on carbon sequestration and 
biodiversity conservation values of ecosystems services from global 
to local communities. These mechanisms include public-private 
partnership, and NGO participation. REDD+ and TEEB allocation 
policies will be interventions in a  highly complex system, and will 
inevitably involve trade-offs; therefore, it is important to question 
the ‘win-win-win’ discourse (Zia and Kauffman 2018; Goulder et al. 
2019). The initial investment and the longer periods of recovery of 
investment are sometimes barriers to private investment. In this 
sense, it is important to have government incentives and encourage 
public-private investment (Ivanova and Lopez 2013).
The World Bank has also established several partnerships since 2010, 
mainly in the field of carbon pricing. Prominent examples are the 
Networked Carbon Markets initiative (established 2013’ spanning 
both governmental actors and experts’ now entering a  phase II) 
and the Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, established in 2015 
and spanning a wide range of governmental and non-governmental 
actors, not least within business (World Bank 2018; World Bank 2019; 
Wettestad et al. 2021). These partnerships deal with knowledge 
production and dissemination and seek to enable implementation 
of carbon pricing policies. The leadership role of the international 
‘heavyweight’ World Bank gives these partnerships additional 
comparative political weight, meaning also a  potentially greater 
involvement of powerful finance ministries/ministers generally 
involved in Bank matters and meetings. 
PPPs for cooperation on climate mitigation goals have emerged 
at multiple levels of governance beyond the realm of international 
organisations. For example, PPP funding for cities expanded rapidly 
in the 1990s and outpaced official external assistance almost 
tenfold. Most of the PPP infrastructure investment has been aimed 
at telecommunications, followed by energy. However, with the 
exception of the telecommunications sector, PPP investments have 
generally bypassed low-income countries (Ivanova 2017). It is 
therefore not surprising that PPPs have added relatively little to the 
financing of urban capital in developing countries over the past two 
decades (Bahl and Linn 2014). Liu and Waibel (2010) argue that the 
inherent risk of urban investment is the main obstacle to increasing 
the flow of private capital. Nevertheless, there have been cases where 
PPP investments have exceeded official external aid flows even for 
water and sanitation, and highly visible projects have been funded 
with PPPs in selected metropolitan areas of developing countries, 
including urban rail projects in Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila 
(Liu and Waibel 2010). 
Local governments are also creating cross-sector social partnerships 
(CSSPs) at the sub-national level, entities created for addressing social, 
economic, and/or environmental issues with partner organisations 
from the public, private and civil society sectors (Crane and Seitanidi 
2014). In particular, with support from international networks such 
as ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability, C40, Global Covenant 
of Mayors, and Global 100% Renewable Energy, local governments 
around the world are committing to aggressive carbon reduction 
targets for their cities (Ivanova et al. 2015; Clarke and Ordonez-Ponce 
2017; Kona et al. 2018). Research on CSSPs implementing community 
most common issues, after waste, energy and water (which are also 
highly relevant to climate mitigation) (MacDonald et al. 2017). 
Community climate action plans consider all GHGs emitted within 
the local geographic boundaries, including from industry, home 
heating, burning fuel in vehicles, and so on. It is these community 
plans that require large multi-stakeholder partnerships to be 
successful. Partners in these partnerships generally include the local 
government departments, other government departments, utilities, 
large businesses, Chambers of Commerce, some small and medium-
sized enterprises, universities, schools, and local civil society groups 
(Clarke and MacDonald 2016). Research shows that the partnership’s 
structural features enable the achievement of plan outcomes, such as 
reducing GHG emissions, while also generating value for the partners 
(Austin and Seitanidi 2012; Clarke and MacDonald 2016; Clarke 
and Ordonez-Ponce 2017). Stua (2017b) explores the Mitigation 
Alliances (MAs) on the national level. The internal governance model 
of MAs consists of overarching authorities mandated to harmonise 
the overall organisational structure. These authorities guarantee an 
effective, equitable and transparent functioning of the MA’s pillars 
(the demand, supply, and exchange of mitigation outcomes), in line 
with the principles and criteria of the Paris Agreement. This hybrid 
governance model relies upon its unique links with international 
climate institutions (Stua 2017a).
Transnational business partnerships are a  growing feature of the 
landscape of multi-level, multi-actor governance of climate change. 
Many business leaders embraced the ethos of ‘business cannot 
succeed in societies that fail’. Examples of this line of reasoning 
are: poverty limits consumer spending, political instability disrupts 
business activity, and climate change threatens the production 
and distribution of goods and services. Such situations endanger 
multinational enterprise investments, global asset management 
funds, and the core business of international insurance companies 
and pension funds (van Tulder et al. 2021).
A leading example is the World Business Council on Sustainable 
Development (WBCSD), a global, CEO-led organisation of over 200 
leading businesses working together to accelerate the transition 
to a sustainable world. Member companies come from all business 
sectors and all major economies, representing a combined revenue of 
more than USD8.5 trillion and with 19 million employees. The WBCSD 
aims to enhance ‘the business case for sustainability through tools, 
services, models and experiences’. It includes a Global Network of 
almost 70 national business councils across the globe. The overall 
vision is to create a world where more than 9 billion people are all 
living well and within the boundaries of our planet, by 2050. Vision 
2050,  released in 2010, explored what a  sustainable world would 
look like in 2050, how such a world could be realised, and the role 
that business can play in making that vision a reality. A few years 
later, Action2020 took that Vision and translated it into a roadmap 
of necessary business actions and solutions (WBCSD 2019). WBCSD 
focuses on those areas where business operates and can make an 
impact. They identify six transformation systems that are critical 
in this regard: Circular Economy, Climate and Energy, Cities and 
Mobility, Food and Nature, People and Redefining Value. All have an impact on climate. An important initiative launched in September 

business investment to capture carbon out of the atmosphere. This 
initiative has built strong cross-sectoral partnerships and is intended 
to tap into this immense emissions reduction solution potential 
through natural methods with the help of private investment.
The Global Methane Initiative (GMI) is a  multilateral partnership 
launched in 2004 by the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency along with 36 other countries to generate a voluntary, non-
binding agenda for global collaboration to decrease anthropogenic 
methane releases. The GMI builds on the Methane to Markets 
(M2M) Partnership, an international partnership launched in 2004. In 
addition to the GMI’s own financial assistance, the initiative receives 
financial backing from the Global Methane Fund (GMF) for methane 
reduction projects. The GMF is a fund created by governments and 
private donors (Leonard 2014).
Another potentially influential type of transnational business 
partnership is investor coalitions or alliances formed for the purpose 
of pushing investee companies to adopt stronger measures for 
stranded asset management and climate change mitigation. MacLeod 
& Park (2011, p. 55) argue that these transnational groups ‘attempt 
to re-orient and “regulate” the behaviour of business by holding 
corporations accountable via mechanisms of information sharing, 
monitoring of environmental impacts, and disclosure of activities 
related to the corporate climate footprint’. This favours a theory of 
active ownership (investor engagement with corporate boards) over 
capital divestment as the optimal pathway to shape the behaviour 
of corporate actors on climate risk (Kruitwagen et al. 2017; Krueger 
et al. 2020).
Transnational cooperative action by investors on climate mitigation 
has been facilitated by international standard-setting on issues 
of climate risk and disclosure. For example, in 2017 the Financial 
Stability Board’s Taskforce on Climate-related Financial Disclosures 
(TCFD) adopted international recommendations for climate risk 
disclosure (TCFD 2017). These recommendations, which apply to all 
financial-sector organisations, including banks, insurance companies, 
asset managers, and asset owners, have received strong support 
from investor coalitions globally, including Climate Action 100+ 
(with 300 investors with more than USD33 trillion in assets under 
management), the Global Investor Coalition on Climate Change 
(a coalition of regional investor groups across Asia, Australia, Europe 
and North America) and the Institutional Investors Group on Climate 
Change (IIGCC). One of the key recommendations of the TCFD calls 
for stress-testing of investment portfolios taking into consideration 
different climate-related scenarios, including a 2°C or lower scenario. 
Broad adoption of the TCFD recommendations could provide a basis 
for decisions by investors to shift assets away from climate-risk 
exposed assets such as fossil fuel extraction projects (Osofsky et al. 
2019). There is strong evidence showing the urgent need for scaling-
up climate finance to mitigate greenhouse gases in line with pursuit 
of limiting the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial 
levels, and to support adaptation to safeguard the international 
community from the consequences of a  changing climate. While 
public actors have a responsibility to deploy climate finance, it is clear 
(Gardiner et al. 2016). 
As most of these partnerships are of recent vintage an assessment of 
their effectiveness is premature. Instead, partnerships can be assessed 
on the basis of the three main functions introduced earlier. Starting 
with policy development, that is, establishing new agreements on 
norms, rules, or standards among a  broader set of governmental 
and non-governmental actors, this is not the most prominent aspect 
of partnerships so far, although both the cities’ networks and risk 
disclosure recommendations include some elements of this. The 
second element, enabling implementation and delivery of services, 
by combining resources from governmental and non-governmental 
actors, seems to be a  more prominent part of the partnerships 
(Ivanova et al. 2020). Both UNEP financing, the WBCSD, the REDD+ 
and TEEB mechanisms, and PPP funding for cities are examples here. 
Finally, the third element, knowledge production and dissemination, 
for example, contributing to the evolution of relevant public policies, 
is the most prominent part of these partnerships, with the majority 
including such activities. 
There is a relatively large volume of literature that assesses PPPs in 
general. Much of this applies to partnerships which, either by design 
or not, advance climate goals. This literature provides a good starting 
point for assessing these partnerships as they become operational. 
These can help assess whether such partnerships are worth the effort 
in terms of their performance and effectiveness (Liu et al. 2017b), their 
economic and social value added (Quélin et al. 2017), their efficiency 
(Estache and Saussier 2014) and the possible risks associated with 
them (Grimsey and Mervyn 2002). 
What is less common, but gradually growing, is an important and 
more relevant literature on criteria to assess sustainability and impact 
on climate and development goals. Michaelowa and Michaelowa 
(2017) assess 109 transnational partnerships and alliances based 
on four design criteria: existence of mitigation targets; incentives for 
mitigation; definition of a baseline; and existence of a monitoring, 
reporting, and verification procedure . About half of the initiatives 
do not meet any of these criteria, and not even 15% satisfy three 
or more. A recent study using a systematic review of business and 
public administration literature on PPPs concludes that research in 
the past rarely incorporated sustainability concepts. The authors 
propose a research agenda and a series of success factors that, if 
appropriately managed, can contribute to sustainable development, 
and in so doing contribute to a more solid scientific evaluation of 
PPPs (Pinz et al. 2018). There is evidence that with the adoption 
of the Sustainable Development Goals, many of which are directly 
linked to climate goals, PPPs will become even more prominent as 
they will be called upon to provide resources, knowledge, expertise, 
and implementation support in a  very ambitious agenda. PPPs in 
the developing world need to take into account different cultural 
and social decision-making processes, language differences, 
and unfamiliar bureaucracy (Gardiner et al. 2016). Having more 
evidence on what norms and standards in relation to sustainability 
are used and their governance is essential (Axel 2019). The issue 
of double counting should be revised. GHGs are accounted both 
at the national and sub-national level or company level (Schneider et al. 2014). Some recent studies aim to provide systems to assess 
the impact of PPPs beyond the much-used notion of value for 
money. One of these recent studies proposes a conceptual model 
that addresses six dimensions relevant to economic, social and 
environmental progress. These include resilience and environment, 
access of services to the population, scalability and replicability, 
economic impact, inclusiveness, and finally, degree of engagement 
of stakeholders (Berrone et al. 2019). These systems will most likely 
continue to evolve.
14.5.5 International Cooperation at the Sub-national 
and City Levels
Local and regional governments have an important role to play in 
global climate action, something recognised by the Paris Agreement, 
and also assessed in Sections 13.3.2 and 13.3.4 of this report. There 
are several ways they can be useful. First, sub-national governments 
can contribute insights and experience that provide valuable lessons 
to national governments, as well as offering needed implementation 
capacity (GIZ 2017; Leffel 2018). A great deal of policymaking has 
occurred at the level of city governments in particular. Cities have 
been responsible for more than 70% of global greenhouse gas 
emissions and generate over 80% of global income (World Bank 
2010), and many of them have started to take their own initiative 
in enacting and developing mitigation policies (CDP 2015). Most of 
these activities aim at the reduction of GHG emissions in the sectors 
of energy, transportation, urban land use and waste (Bulkeley 2010; 
Xuemei 2007), and are motivated by concerns not only over climate, 
but also a  consideration of local co-benefits (Rashidi et al. 2017, 
2019). Second, sub-national governments can fill the void in policy 
leadership in cases where national governments are ineffectual, even 
to the point of claiming leadership and authority with respect to 
foreign affairs (Leffel 2018). International cooperation plays a role in 
such action. Several international networks, such as C40, ICLEI, Mayors 
for Climate Protection, and the Covenant of Mayors have played an 
important role in defining and developing climate-policy initiatives 
at the city level (Fünfgeld 2015). While the networks differ from each 
other, they generally are voluntary and non-hierarchical, intended to 
support the horizontal diffusion of innovative climate policies through 
information-sharing platforms linked to specific goals that member 
cities make (Kern and Bulkeley 2009). The literature has addressed 
the questions of why cities join the networks (Betsill and Bulkeley 
2004; Pitt 2010), what recognition benefits cities can expect (Buis 
2009; Kern and Bulkeley 2009), and how memberships can provide 
visibility to leverage international funding (Betsill and Bulkeley 2004; 
Heinrichs et al. 2013). Membership in the networks has been found 
to be a significant predictor of cities’ adoption of mitigation policies, 
even when controlling for national-level policies that may be in place 
(Rashidi and Patt 2018). Kona et al. (2018) find that cities belonging 
to the Covenant of Mayors are engaging in emissions reductions at 
a  rate consistent with achieving a  2°C global temperature target. 
Kona et al. (2021) document this trend continuing.
With respect to their role in formal international cooperation, however, 
it is unclear what authority, as a non-state actor, they actually have. 
Cities, for example, are members of transnational initiatives aimed at 
state Actor Zone for Climate Action, under the UNFCCC. While there is 
reason to believe that such membership can add value to mitigation 
efforts, one study suggests that the environmental effects have yet 
to be reliably quantified (Hsu et al. 2019a). By contrast, Kuramochi 
et al. (2020) provide evidence that non-state actors are leading 
to significant emissions reductions beyond what countries would 
otherwise be achieving. In terms of institutional strength, Michaelowa 
and Michaelowa (2017) suggest that few such networks fulfil 
governance criteria, and hence challenge their effectiveness. Several 
researchers suggest that their role is important in informal ways, given 
issues about the legitimacy of non-state actors (Chan et al. 2016; 
Nasiritousi et al. 2016). Bäckstrand et al. (2017) advance the concept 
of ‘hybrid multilateralism’ as a heuristic to capture this intensified 
interplay between state and non-state actors in the new landscape of 
international climate cooperation. The effectiveness of such non-state 
government actors should be measured not only by their contribution 
to mitigation, but also by their success to enhance the accountability, 
transparency and deliberative quality of the UNFCCC and the Paris 
Agreement (Chan et al. 2015; Busby 2016; Hale et al. 2016). In the 
post-Paris era, effectiveness also revolves around how to align non-
state and intergovernmental action in a comprehensive framework 
that can help achieve low carbon futures (Chan et al. 2016). Stua 
(2017b) suggests that networks involving non-state actors can play 
an important role in enhancing transparency. Such effectiveness has 
to be complemented also by normative questions, applying a  set 
of democratic values: participation, deliberation, accountability, 
and transparency (Bäckstrand and Kuyper 2017). Such concepts of 
polycentric governance offer new opportunities for climate action, 
but it has been argued that it is too early to judge their importance 
and effects (Jordan et al. 2015).
14.6 Synthesis
14.6.1 Changing Nature of International Cooperation
The main development since AR5 in terms of international climate 
cooperation has been the shift from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris 
Agreement as the primary multilateral driver of climate mitigation 
policy worldwide (Section  14.3). Most ex-post assessments of the 
Kyoto Protocol suggest that it did lead to emissions reductions in 
countries with binding targets, in addition to changing investment 
patterns in low-carbon technologies. As noted earlier, the Paris 
Agreement is tailored to the evolving understanding of the climate 
mitigation challenge as well as shifting political imperatives and 
constraints. Whether the Paris Agreement will in fact be effective 
in supporting global action sufficient to achieve its objectives is 
contested, with competing arguments in the scientific literature 
supporting different views. To some extent these views align with the 
different analytic frameworks (Section 14.2.1): the Paris Agreement 
does not address the free-riding issue seen as important within the 
global commons framing, but may provide the necessary incentives 
and support mechanisms viewed as important under the political and 
transitions framings, respectively. The strongest critique of the Paris 
Agreement is that current NDCs themselves fail by a wide margin to add up to the level of aggregate emissions reductions necessary to 
achieve the objectives of holding global average warming well below 
2°C, much less 1.5°C (Section  14.3.3 Figure  14.2), and that there 
is no legally binding obligation to achieve the NDCs. Arguments in 
support of Paris are that it puts in place the processes, and generates 
normative expectations, that nudge NDCs to become progressively 
more ambitious over time, including in developing countries. The 
growing number of countries with mid-century net-zero GHG or CO 2 
targets, consistent with Article 4 of the Paris Agreement, lends support 
to this proposition, although there is as yet no empirical literature 
drawing an unambiguous connection. The collective quantified goal 
from a  floor of USD100 billion a  year in transfers to developing 
countries, the Green Climate Fund and other provisions on finance in 
the Paris Agreement have also been recognised as key to cooperation 
(Sections 14.3.2.8 and 14.4.1). But then these arguments are met 
with counter arguments, that even with Paris processes in place, 
given the logic of iterative, rising levels of ambition over time, this 
is unlikely to happen within the narrow window of opportunity that 
exists to avert dangerous levels of global warming (Section 14.3.3). 
The degree to which countries are willing to increase the ambition 
and secure the achievement of their NDCs over time will be an 
important indicator of the success of the Paris Agreement; evidence 
of this was expected by the end of 2020, but the COVID-19 pandemic 
has delayed the process of updating NDCs. 
An increasing role is also played by other cooperative agreements, in 
particular (potentially) under Article 6 (Sections 14.3.2.10 and 14.4.4), 
transnational partnerships, and the institutions that support them. This 
fits both a transitions narrative that cooperation at the sub-global and 
sectoral levels is necessary to enable specific system transformations, 
and a recent emphasis in the public goods literature on club goods and 
a gradual approach to cooperation, also referred to as building blocks 
or incremental approach (Sections 14.2 and 14.5.1.4). There has been 
little analysis of whether these other agreements are of sufficient scale 
and scope to ensure that transformations happen quickly enough. This 
chapter, appraising them together, concludes that they are not. First, 
many agreements, such as those related to trade, may stand in the 
way of bottom-up mitigation efforts (Section 14.5.1.3). Second, many 
sectoral agreements aimed at decarbonisation –  such as within the 
air travel sector – have not yet adopted targets comparable in scale, 
scope or legal character to those adopted under the Paris Agreement 
(Section 14.5.2.3). Third, there are many sectors for which there are 
no agreements in place. At the same time, there are some important 
bright spots, many in the area of transnational partnerships. A growing 
number of cities have committed themselves to adopting urban policies 
that will place them on a path to rapid decarbonisation, while learning 
from each other how to implement successful policies to realise climate 
goals (Section 14.5.5). An increasing number of large corporations have 
committed to decarbonising their industrial processes and supply chains 
(Section  14.5.4). And an ever-increasing number of non-state actors 
are adopting goals and initiating mitigation actions (Section 14.5.3). 
These goals and actions, some argue, could bridge the mitigation gap 
created by inadequate NDCs, although the empirical literature to date 
challenges this, suggesting that there is less transparency and limited 
accountability for such actions, and mitigation targets and incentives 
are also not clear (Sections 14.3.3 and 14.5). 
This section provides an overall assessment of international 
cooperation, taking into account the combined effects of cooperation 
within the UNFCCC process, other global agreements, as well as 
regional, sectoral, and transnational processes. Recent literature 
consistent with the transitions framing highlights that cooperation 
can be particularly effective when it addresses issues on a  sector-
by-sector basis (Geels et al. 2019). Table 14.4 below summarises the 
effects of international cooperation on mitigation efforts in each of 
the sectoral areas covered in Chapters 5 to 12 of this report. As it 
indicates, there are some strong areas of sector-specific cooperation, 
but also some important weaknesses. Formal agreements and 
programmes, both multilateral and bilateral, are advancing mitigation 
efforts in energy, AFOLU, and transportation, while transnational 
networks and partnerships are addressing issues in urban systems, 
industry, and buildings. Although many of the concerns relevant for 
buildings may be embedded in the energy sector with respect to their 
operation, and the industrial sector with respect to their materials, 
reinforcing the networks with more formal agreements could be 
vital to putting these sectors on a pathway to net zero GHG or CO 2 
emissions. Several of the sectors have very little formal cooperation 
at the international level, and a common theme across many of them 
is a need for increased financial flows to achieve particular objectives.
Table  14.5 provides examples of mechanisms addressing each 
of the assessment criteria identified in Section 14.2.3. The effects of  
different forms of international cooperation are separated out, 
including not only UNFCCC and other multilateral processes, but also 
sub-global and sectoral agreements. Several points stand out. First, 
the Paris Agreement has the potential to significantly advance the UN climate regime’s transformative potential. Second, the international 
market mechanisms under Article 6  – should an agreement on 
implementation deals be reached – allow a shift from projects and 
programmes to policy-based and sectoral generation of emissions 
credits. Moreover, the sectoral agreement CORSIA also makes use 
of such credits. Third, there is a lack of attention to both distributive 
outcomes and institutional support within sectoral agreements, 
representing a serious gap in efforts to harmonise mitigation with 
equity and sustainable development. Fourth, there are transnational 
partnerships and initiatives, representing the actions of non-state 
actors, addressing each of the assessment criteria, with the exception 
of economic effectiveness.
Table 14.4 | Effects of international cooperation on sectoral mitigation efforts.
Sector Key strengths Key gaps and weaknesses
Demand, services,  
social aspectsAdoption of SDGs addressing social inequities and 
sustainable development in the context of mitigationLittle international attention to demand-side mitigation issues
EnergyGreater incorporation of climate goals into sectoral 
agreements and institutions; formation of new specialised 
agencies (e.g., IRENA, SE4All) devoted to climate-
compatible energyNeed for enhanced financial support to place low-carbon energy sources on an equal footing 
with carbon-emitting energy in developing countries; investor–state dispute settlement 
mechanisms designed to protect the interests of companies engaged in high-carbon energy 
supply from national policies; ensuring just transition; and, addressing stranded assets
AFOLUBilateral support for REDD+ activities; transnational 
partnerships disincentivising use of products from 
degraded landsNeed for increased global finance for forest restoration projects and REDD+ activities; 
failure of national governments to meet internationally agreed upon targets with 
respect to deforestation and restoration; no cooperative mechanisms in place to address 
agricultural emissions
Urban systemsTransnational partnerships enhancing the capacity 
of municipal governments to design and implement 
effective policiesNeed for increased financial support for climate-compatible urban infrastructure development
BuildingsTransnational initiative aimed at developing 
regional roadmapsNeed for formal international cooperation to enhance mitigation activities in buildings
TransportSectoral agreements in aviation and shipping begin 
to address climate concernsNeed to raise the level of ambition in sectoral agreements consistent with the Paris 
Agreement and complete decarbonisation, especially as emissions from international aviation 
and shipping continue to grow, unaccounted for in NDCs
IndustryTransnational partnerships and networks encouraging 
the adoption of zero-emission supply chain targetsNo formal multilateral or bilateral cooperation to address issues of decarbonisation 
in industry
Cross-sectoral, including 
CDR and SRMInternational agreements addressing risks  
of ocean-based CDRLack of cooperative mechanisms addressing risks and benefits of SRM; lack of 
cooperative mechanisms addressing financial and governance aspects of land- 
and technology-based CDR
Environmental 
effectivenessTransformative 
potentialDistributive 
outcomesEconomic  
effectivenessInstitutional strength
UNFCCCStabilisation goal, 
and quasi-targets for 
industrialised countriesFinancial mechanism; 
technology mechanism, 
provisions for 
capacity buildingFinancial mechanism, 
transfers from 
developed to 
developing countries; 
leadership role 
for industrialised 
countries listed 
in Annex 1Reporting requirements; capacity building 
for national climate change offices
Kyoto ProtocolBinding national 
targets for 
industrialised countriesAdaptation Fund; 
targets restricted 
to industrialised 
countriesMarket-based 
mechanismsEmissions accounting and reporting requirements; 
institutional capacity building
Paris AgreementNDCs and the 
global stocktakeMechanisms for 
capacity building and 
technology development 
and transferFurthering financial 
commitments 
under the UNFCCC, 
including enhanced 
transparency 
on financeVoluntary 
cooperationMechanism for enhanced transparency
Other multilateral 
agreements
(Montreal Protocol, 
SDG 7, etc.)Phase out of ozone-
depleting substances 
with high global 
warming potential; 
significant effects on 
GHG mitigation Ozone Fund; 
technology transfer; 
development and 
sharing of knowledge 
and expertiseSDGs embedding 
mitigation in 
sustainable 
developmentProcesses for adjustment and amendment;  
reporting requirements
Multilateral and 
regional economic 
agreements 
and institutionsHarmonised lending 
practices of MDBs; 
mainstreaming climate 
change into IMF 
practices; liberalisation 
of trade in climate-
friendly goods and 
services; negative effect 
from regulatory chillConcessional 
financing agreementsPotentially negative results from dispute  
settlement processes
Sectoral agreements 
and institutionsClimate mitigation 
targets and actions 
in AFOLU, energy, 
and transport Institutions devoted 
to developing and 
deploying zero-carbon 
energy technologies 
(e.g., IRENA)Use of carbon 
offsets to reduce 
growth in emissions 
from aviation
Transnational 
networks and 
partnershipsYouth climate 
movement raising 
mitigation and fossil 
fuel divestment on 
political agendas  
and in financial sectorNon-state actor 
commitments to 
renewable energy-based 
supply chainsClimate justice  
legal initiativesCity networks providing information exchange  
and technical support
Any assessment of the effectiveness of international cooperation 
is limited by the methodological challenge of observing sufficient 
variance in cooperation in order to support inference on effects. 
There is little in the way of cross-sectional variance, given that 
most of the governance mechanisms assessed here are global in 
their geographical coverage. One exception is with respect to the 
effects of the Kyoto Protocol, which we have reported. Time series 
analysis is also challenging, given that other determinants of climate 
mitigation, including technology costs and the effects of national and 
sub-national level policies, are rapidly evolving. Thus, this chapter 
primarily reviews scholarship that compares observations with 
theory-based counterfactual scenarios.
Many of the international agreements and institutions discussed in 
this chapter, in particular the Paris Agreement, are new. The logic and 
architecture of the Paris Agreement, in particular, breaks new ground, 
and there is limited evaluation of prior experience in the form of 
analogous treaties to draw on. Such instruments have evolved in 
response to geopolitical and other drivers that are changing rapidly, 
and will continue to shape the nature of international cooperation 
under it and triggered by it. The Paris Agreement is also, in common 
with other multilateral agreements, a  ‘living instrument’ evolving 
through interpretative and operationalising rules, and forms of 
implementation, that Parties continue to negotiate at conferences 
year on year. It is a constant ‘work in progress’ and thus challenging 
to assess at any given point in time. The Paris Agreement also engages 
a larger set of variables – given its privileging of national autonomy 
and politics, integration with the sustainable development agenda, 
and its engagement with actions and actors at multiple levels – than 
earlier international agreements, which further complicates the task 
of tracing causality between observed effects and international 
cooperation through the Paris Agreement.
Understanding of the effectiveness of international agreements and 
institutions is driven entirely by theory-driven prediction of how 
the world will evolve, both with these agreements in place and 
without them. The predictions in particular are problematic, because 
governance regimes are complex adaptive systems, making it 
impossible to predict how they will evolve over time, and hence what 
their effects will be. Time will cure this in part, as it will generate 
observations of the world with the new regime in place, which we can 
compare to the counterfactual situation of the new regime’s being 
absent, which may be a simpler situation to model. But even here our 
modelling capacity is limited: it may simply never be possible to know 
with a high degree of confidence whether international cooperation, 
such as that embodied in the Paris Agreement, is having a significant 
effect, no matter how much data are accumulated. 
Given the importance of theory for guiding assessments of the past 
and likely future impacts of policies, it is important to note that 
among the alternative theoretical frameworks for analysis, some have 
been much more extensively developed in the literature than others. 
This chapter has noted in particular the partial dichotomy between 
a  global commons framing of climate change and a  transitions 
framing, which include different indicators to be used to evaluate the effectiveness of policies. The latter framing is particularly under-
developed. Greater development of theories resting in social science 
disciplines such as economic geography, sociology, and psychology 
could potentially provide a more complete picture of the nature and 
effectiveness of international cooperation.
FAQ 14.1 |  Is international cooperation working?
Yes, to an extent. Countries’ emissions were in line with their internationally agreed targets: the collective greenhouse gas (GHG) 
mitigation target for Annex I countries in the UNFCCC to return to their 1990 emissions levels by 2000, and their individual targets 
in the Kyoto Protocol for 2008–12. Numerous studies suggest that participation in the Kyoto Protocol led to substantial reductions in 
national GHG emissions, as well increased levels of innovation and investment in low-carbon technologies. In this latter respect, the 
Kyoto Protocol set in motion some of the transformational changes that will be required to meet the temperature goal of the Paris 
Agreement. It is too soon to tell whether the processes and commitments embodied in the Paris Agreement will be effective in achieving 
its stated goals with respect to limiting temperature rise, adaptation, and financial flows. There is, however, evidence that its entry into 
force has been a contributing factor to many countries’ adopting mid-century targets of net-zero GHG or CO 2 emissions. 
FAQ 14.2 |  What is the future role of international cooperation in the context  
of the Paris Agreement?
Continued international cooperation remains critically important both to stimulate countries’ enhanced levels of mitigation ambition, 
and through various means of support to increase the likelihood that they achieve these objectives. The latter is particularly the 
case in developing countries, where mitigation efforts often rely on bilateral and multilateral cooperation on low-carbon finance, 
technology support, capacity building, and enhanced South-South cooperation. The Paris Agreement is structured around Nationally 
Determined Contributions that are subject to an international oversight system, and bolstered through international support. 
The international oversight system is designed to generate transparency and accountability for individual emissions reduction 
contributions, and regular moments for stock-taking of these efforts towards global goals. Such enhanced transparency may instil 
confidence and trust, and foster solidarity among nations, with theory-based arguments that this will lead to greater levels of 
ambition. Together with other cooperative agreements at the sub-global and sectoral levels, as well as a  growing number of 
transnational networks and initiatives, the implementation of all of these mechanisms is likely to play an important role in making 
political, economic, and social conditions more favourable to ambitious mitigation efforts in the context of sustainable development 
and efforts to eradicate poverty. 
FAQ 14.3 |   Are there any important gaps in international cooperation, which will need to be 
filled in order for countries to achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement, such 
as holding temperature increase to well below 2°C and pursuing efforts towards 
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels?
While international cooperation is contributing to global mitigation efforts, its effects are far from uniform. Cooperation has 
contributed to setting a global direction of travel, and to falling greenhouse gas emissions in many countries and avoided emissions 
in others. It remains to be seen whether it can achieve the kind of transformational changes needed to achieve the Paris Agreement’s 
long-term global goals. There appears to be a large potential role for international cooperation to better address sector-specific 
technical and infrastructure challenges that are associated with such transformational changes. Finalising the rules to pursue 
voluntary cooperation, such as through international carbon market mechanisms and public climate finance in the implementation 
of NDCs, without compromising environmental integrity, may play an important role in accelerating mitigation efforts in developing 
countries. Finally, there is room for international cooperation to more explicitly address transboundary issues associated with carbon 
dioxide removal and solar radiation management. 