
Executive Summary
Innovation in climate mitigation technologies has seen 
enormous activity and significant progress in recent years. 
Innovation has also led to, and exacerbated, trade-offs 
in relation to sustainable development (high confidence). 
Innovation can leverage action to mitigate climate change by 
reinforcing other interventions. In conjunction with other enabling 
conditions, innovation can support system transitions to limit 
warming and help shift development pathways. The currently 
widespread implementation of solar photovoltaic (solar PV) and 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), for instance, could not have happened 
without technological innovation (high confidence). Technological 
innovation can also bring about new and improved ways of delivering 
services that are essential to human well-being. At the same time 
as delivering benefits, innovation can result in trade-offs that 
undermine both progress on mitigation and progress towards other 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Trade-offs include negative 
externalities  – for instance, greater environmental pollution and 
social inequalities – rebound effects leading to lower net emission 
reductions or even increases in emissions, and increased dependency 
on foreign knowledge and providers (high confidence). Effective 
governance and policy has the potential to avoid and minimise such 
misalignments (medium evidence, high agreement). {16.1, 16.2, 
16.3, 16.4, 16.5.1, 16.6}
A systemic view of innovation to direct and organise the 
processes has grown over the last decade. This systemic view 
of innovation takes into account the role of actors, institutions 
and their interactions, and can inform how innovation systems 
that vary across technologies, sectors and countries, can 
be strengthened (high confidence). Where a  systemic view of 
innovation has been taken, it has enabled the development and 
implementation of indicators that are better able to provide insights 
into innovation processes. This, in turn, has enabled the analysis 
and strengthening of innovation systems. Traditional quantitative 
innovation indicators mainly include research and development 
(R&D) investments and patents. Systemic indicators of innovation, 
however, go well beyond these approaches. They include structural 
innovation system elements including actors and networks, as well 
as indicators for how innovation systems function, such as access to 
finance, employment in relevant sectors, and lobbying activities. For 
example, in Latin America, monitoring systemic innovation indicators 
for the effectiveness of agroecological mitigation approaches has 
provided insights on the appropriateness and social alignment of 
new technologies and practices. Climate-energy-economy models, 
including integrated assessment models, generally employ a stylised 
and necessarily incomplete view of innovation, and have yet to 
incorporate a systemic representation of innovation systems. {16.2, 
16.2.4, 16.3, 16.3.4, 16.5, Table 16.7, Box 16.1, Box 16.3, Box 16.10}
A systemic perspective on technological change can provide 
insights to policymakers supporting their selection of effective 
innovation policy instruments (high confidence). A combination 
of scaled-up innovation investments with demand-pull interventions 
can achieve faster technology unit cost reductions and more rapid 
scale-up than either approach in isolation (high confidence). These innovation policy instruments would nonetheless have to be tailored 
to local development priorities, to the specific context of different 
countries, and to the technology being supported. The timing of 
interventions and any trade-offs with sustainable development 
also need to be addressed. Public R&D funding and support, as 
well as innovation procurement, have proven valuable for fostering 
innovation in small to medium cleantech firms. Innovation outcomes 
of policy instruments not necessarily aimed at innovation, such 
as feed-in tariffs, auctions, emissions trading schemes, taxes and 
renewable portfolio standards, vary from negligible to positive for 
climate change mitigation. Some specific designs of environmental 
taxation can also result in negative distributional outcomes. Most 
of the available literature and evidence on innovation systems 
come from industrialised countries and larger developing countries. 
However, there is a  growing body of evidence from developing 
countries and Small Island Developing States (SIDS). {16.4, 16.4.4.3, 
16.4.4.4, 16.5, 16.7}
Experience and analyses show that technological change is 
inhibited if technological innovation system functions are 
not adequately fulfilled. This inhibition occurs more often 
in developing countries (high confidence). Examples of such 
functions are knowledge development, resource mobilisation, and 
activities that shape the needs, requirements and expectations 
of actors within the innovation system (guidance of the search). 
Capabilities play a key role in these functions, the build-up of which 
can be enhanced by domestic measures, but also by international 
cooperation (high confidence). For instance, innovation cooperation 
on wind energy has contributed to the accelerated global spread 
of this technology. As another example, the policy guidance by the 
Indian government, which also promoted development of data, 
testing capabilities and knowledge within the private sector, has been 
a key determinant of the success of an energy-efficiency programme 
for air conditioners and refrigerators in India. {16.3, 16.5, 16.6, Cross-
Chapter Box 12 in this chapter, Box 16.2}
Consistent with innovation system approaches, the sharing 
of knowledge and experiences between developed and 
developing countries can contribute to addressing global 
climate and SDGs. The effectiveness of such international 
cooperation arrangements, however, depends on the way 
they are developed and implemented (high confidence). The 
effectiveness and sustainable development benefits of technology 
sharing under market conditions appear to be determined primarily 
by the complexity of technologies, local capabilities and the 
policy regime. This suggests that the development of planning 
and innovation capabilities remains necessary, especially in least-
developed countries and SIDS. International diffusion of low-emission 
technologies is also facilitated by knowledge spillovers from regions 
engaged in clean R&D (medium confidence). {16.6}
The evidence on the role of intellectual property rights (IPR) 
in innovation is mixed. Some literature suggests that it is 
a  barrier, while other sources suggest that it is an enabler 
to the diffusion of climate-related technologies (medium 
confidence). There is agreement that countries with well-developed 
institutional capacity may benefit from a strengthened IPR regime, 
but that countries with limited capabilities might face greater barriers 
to innovation as a consequence. This enhances the continued need for 
capacity building. Ideas to improve the alignment of the global IPR 
regime and address climate change include specific arrangements for 
least-developed countries, case-by-case decision-making and patent-
pooling institutions. {16.2.3.3, 16.5, Box 16.9}
Although some initiatives have mobilised investments in 
developing countries, gaps in innovation cooperation remain, 
including in the Paris Agreement instruments. These gaps 
could be filled by enhancing financial support for international 
technology cooperation, by strengthening cooperative 
approaches, and by helping build suitable capacity in developing 
countries across all technological innovation system functions 
(high confidence). The implementation of current arrangements of 
international cooperation for technology development and transfer, 
as well as capacity building, are insufficient to meet climate objectives 
and contribute to sustainable development. For example, despite 
building a  large market for mitigation technologies in developing 
countries, the lack of a systemic perspective in the implementation 
of the Clean Development Mechanism, operational since the mid-
2000s, has only led to some technology transfer, especially to larger 
developing countries, but limited capacity building and minimal 
technology development (medium confidence). In the current 
climate regime, a more systemic approach to innovation cooperation 
could be introduced by linking technology institutions, such as the 
Technology Mechanism, and financial actors, such as the financial 
mechanism. {16.5.3}
Countries are exposed to sustainable development challenges 
in parallel with the challenges that relate to climate change. 
Addressing both sets of challenges simultaneously presents 
multiple and recurrent obstacles that systemic approaches 
to technological change could help resolve, provided they 
are well managed (high confidence). Obstacles include both 
entrenched power relations dominated by vested interests that 
control and benefit from existing technologies, and governance 
structures that continue to reproduce unsustainable patterns of 
production and consumption (medium confidence). Studies also 
highlight the potential for cultural factors to strongly influence the 
pace and direction of technological change. Sustainable solutions 
require adoption and mainstreaming of locally novel technologies 
that can meet local needs, and simultaneously address the SDGs. 
Acknowledging the systemic nature of technological innovation, 
which involves many levels of actors, stages of innovation and 
scales, can lead to new opportunities to shift development pathways 
towards sustainability. {16.4, 16.5, 16.6}
An area where sustainable development, climate change 
mitigation and technological change interact is digitalisation. 
Digital technologies can promote large increases in energy 
efficiency through coordination and an economic shift to 
services, but they can also greatly increase energy demand 
because of the energy used in digital devices. System-level 
rebound effects may also occur (high confidence). Digital 
devices, including servers, increase pressure on the environment due 
to the demand for rare metals and end-of-life disposal. The absence of adequate governance in many countries can lead to harsh 
working conditions and unregulated disposal of electronic waste. 
Digitalisation also affects firms’ competitiveness, the demand for 
skills, and the distribution of, and access to, resources. The existing 
digital divide, especially in developing countries, and the lack of 
appropriate governance of the digital revolution can hamper the 
role that digitalisation could play in supporting the achievement of 
stringent mitigation targets. At present, the understanding of both 
the direct and indirect impacts of digitalisation on energy use, carbon 
emissions and potential mitigation, is limited (medium confidence). 
{Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter, 16.2}
Strategies for climate change mitigation can be most effective 
in accelerating transformative change when actions taken to 
strengthen one set of enabling conditions also reinforce and 
strengthen the effectiveness of other enabling conditions 
(medium confidence). Applying transition or system dynamics 
to decisions can help policymakers take advantage of such high-
leverage intervention points, address the specific characteristics of 
technological stages, and respond to societal dynamics. Inspiration 
can be drawn from the global unit cost reductions of solar PV, which 
were accelerated by a combination of factors interacting in a mutually 
reinforcing way across a limited group of countries (high confidence). 
{Box 16.4, Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter}
Better and more comprehensive data on innovation indicators 
can provide timely insights for policymakers and policy design 
locally, nationally and internationally, especially for developing 
countries, where such insights are missing more often. Data 
needed include those that can show the strength of technological, 
sectoral and national innovation systems. It is also necessary to 
validate current results and generate insights from theoretical 
frameworks and empirical studies for developing countries contexts. 
Innovation studies on adaptation and mitigation other than energy 
and ex-post assessments of the effectiveness of various innovation-
related policies and interventions, including R&D, would also provide 
benefits. Furthermore, methodological developments to improve the 
ability of integrated assessment models (IAMs) to capture energy 
innovation system dynamics, and the relevant institutions and 
policies (including design and implementation), would allow for more 
realistic assessment. {16.2, 16.3, 16.7}
16.1 Introduction
Technological change and innovation are considered key drivers of 
economic growth and social progress (Brandão Santana et al. 2015; 
Heeks and Stanforth 2015). Increased production and consumption 
of goods and services creates economic benefits through higher 
demands for improved technologies (Gossart 2015). Since the 
Industrial Revolution, however, and notwithstanding the benefits, this 
production and consumption trend and the technological changes 
associated with it have also come at the cost of long-term damage 
to the life support systems of our planet (Alarcón and Vos 2015; 
Steffen et al. 2015). The significance of such impacts depends on the 
technology, but also on the intrinsic characteristics of the country or 
region analysed (Brandão Santana et al. 2015).
Other chapters in this volume have discussed technological change in 
various ways, including as a framing issue (Chapter 1), in the context 
of specific sectors (Chapters 6–11), for specific purposes (Chapter 12) 
and as a  matter of policy, international cooperation and finance 
(Chapters  13–15). Chapter  2  discusses past trends in technological 
change and chapters 3 and 4 discuss it in the context of future modelling. 
In general, implicitly or explicitly, technological change is assigned an 
important role in climate change mitigation and achieving sustainable 
development (Thacker et al. 2019), as also discussed in past IPCC reports 
(IPCC 2014, 2018a). Chapter  16 describes how a  well-established 
innovation system at a national level, guided by well-designed policies, 
can contribute to achieving mitigation and adaptation targets along 
with broader Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), while avoiding 
undesired consequences of technological change.
The environmental impacts of social and economic activities, 
including emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), are greatly 
influenced by the rate and direction of technological changes (Jaffe 
et al. 2000). Technological changes usually designed and used to 
increase productivity and reduce the use of natural resources can 
lead to increased production and consumption of goods and services 
through different rebound effects that diminish the potential benefits 
of reducing the pressure on the environment (Kemp and Soete 1990; 
Grübler 1998; Sorrell 2007; Barker et al. 2009; Gossart 2015).
Those environmental impacts depend not only on which technologies 
are used, but also on how they are used (Grübler et al. 1999a). Technological change is not exogenous to social and economic 
systems; technologies are not conceived, selected, and applied 
autonomously (Grubler et al. 2018). Underlying driving forces of 
the problem, such as more resource-intensive lifestyles and larger 
populations (Hertwich and Peters 2009; UNEP 2014), remain largely 
unchallenged. Comprehensive knowledge of the direct and indirect 
effects of technological changes on physical and social systems 
could improve decision-making, including in those cases where 
technological change mitigates environmental impacts.
A sustainable global future for people and nature requires rapid and 
transformative societal change by integrating technical, governance 
(including participation), financial and societal aspects of the solutions 
to be implemented (Sachs et al. 2019; Pörtner et al. 2021). A growing 
body of interdisciplinary research from around the world can inform 
implementation of adaptive solutions that address the benefits and 
drawbacks of linkages in social-ecological complexity, including 
externalities and rebound effects from innovation and technological 
transformation (Balvanera et al. 2017; Pörtner et al. 2021).
Technological change and transitional knowledge can reinforce 
each other. The value of traditional wisdom and its technological 
practices provide examples of sustainable and adaptive systems 
that could potentially adapt to and mitigate climate change (Kuoljok 
2019; Singh et al. 2020). Peasants and traditional farmers have been 
able to respond well to climate changes through their wisdom and 
traditional  practices (Nicholls and Alteri 2013). The integration of 
the traditional wisdom with new technologies can offer new and 
effective solutions (Galloway McLean 2010).
Achieving climate change mitigation and other SDGs thus also 
requires rapid diffusion of knowledge and technological innovations. 
However, these are hampered by various barriers, some of which are 
illustrated in Table 16.1 (Markard et al. 2020).
The literature has been growing rapidly over the past decades on 
how, in a systemic way, the barriers to sustainability transition can be 
overcome in various circumstances. A central element is that national 
systems of innovation can help achieve both climate change goals and 
SDGs, by integrating new ideas, devices, resources, new and traditional 
knowledge, and technological changes for more effective and adaptive 
solutions (Lundvall 1992). At the organisational level, innovation is seen 
Table 16.1 | Overview of challenges to accelerated diffusion of technological innovations.  Source: based on Markard et al. (2020).
Challenges Description Examples
Innovations in whole systemsSince entire systems are changing, changes in system architecture 
are also needed, which may not keep pace.Decentralisation of electricity supply and integration of variable sources.
Interaction between multiple 
systems and subsystemsSimultaneous, accelerating changes multiple systems or sectors, 
vying for the same resources and showing other interactions.Electrification of transport, heating and industry all using the same 
renewable electricity source.
Industry decline and 
incumbent resistanceDecline of existing industries and businesses can lead to incumbents 
slowing down change, and resistance, e.g., from unions or workers.Traditional car industry leading to facture closures, demise of coal mining 
and coal-fired power generation leading to local job loss.
Consumers and 
social practicesConsumers need to change practices and demand patterns.Reduced car ownership in a sharing economy, trip planning for public 
and non-motorised transport, fuelling practices in electric driving.
Coordination in 
governance and policyIncreasing complexity of governance requires coordination between 
multiple levels of government and a multitude of actors relevant to 
the transition, e.g., communities, financial institutions, private sector.Multilevel governance between European Commission and member states 
in Energy Union package.
as a process that can bring value by means of creating more effective 
products, services, processes, technologies, policies and business 
models that are applicable to commercial, business, financial and even 
societal or political organisations (Brooks 1980; Arthur 2009).
The literature refers to the terms ‘technology push‘, ‘market pull‘, 
‘regulatory push-pull‘, and ‘firm specific factors‘ as drivers for 
innovation, mostly to inform policymakers (Zubeltzu-Jaka et al. 2018). 
There has also been growing interest in social drivers, motivated by the 
recognition of social issues, such as unemployment and public health, 
linked to the deployment of innovative low-carbon technologies 
(Altantsetseg et al. 2020). Policy and social factors and the diverse 
trajectories of innovation are influenced by regional and national 
conditions (Tariq et al. 2017), and such local needs and purposes need 
to be considered in crafting international policies aimed at fostering 
the global transition towards increased sustainability (Caravella and 
Crespi 2020). From this standpoint, a multidimensional, multi-actor, 
systemic innovation approach would be needed to enhance global 
innovation diffusion (de Jesus and Mendonça 2018), especially if this 
is to lead to overall sustainability improvements rather than result in 
new sustainability challenges.
Policies to mitigate climate change do not always take into account 
the effects of mitigation technologies on other environmental 
and social challenges (Arvesen et al. 2011). Policies also often 
disregard the strong linkages between technological innovation 
and social innovation; the latter is understood to be the use of soft 
technologies that brings about transformation through establishing 
new institutions, new practices, and new models to create a positive 
societal impact, characterised by collaboration that crosses traditional 
roles and boundaries, between citizens, civil society, the state, and 
the private sector (Reynolds et al. 2017). Market forces do not provide 
sufficient incentives for investment in development or diffusion of 
technologies, leaving a role for public policy to create the conditions 
to assure a  systemic innovation approach (Popp 2010; Popp and 
Newell 2012). Moreover, public action is more than just addressing 
market failure, it is an unalienable element of an innovation system 
(Mazzucato 2013).
Coupling technological innovation with sustainable development 
and the SDGs would need to address overall social, environmental, and 
economic consequences, given that public policy is intertwined with 
innovation, technological changes and other factors in a  complex 
manner. Chapter 16 is organised in the following manner to provide 
an overview of innovation and technology development and transfer 
for climate change and sustainable development.
Section  16.2 discusses drivers of innovation process, including 
macro factors that can redirect technological change towards low-
carbon options. Representations of these drivers in mathematical 
and statistical models allow for explaining the past and constructing 
projections of future technological change. They also integrate the 
analysis of drivers and consequences of technological change within 
economic-energy-economy (or integrated assessment) models 
(Chapter  3). The section also describes the different phases of 
innovation and metrics, such as the widely used but also criticised 
technology readiness levels (TRLs).Section  16.3 discusses innovation as a  systemic process based on 
recent literature. While the innovation process is often stylised as 
a linear process, innovation is now predominantly seen as a systemic 
process in that it is a result of actions by, and interactions among, 
a  large set of actors, whose activities are shaped by, and shape, 
the context in which they operate and the user group with which 
they are engaging.
Section  16.4 presents innovation and technology policy, including 
technology push (e.g.,  publicly funded R&D) and demand-pull 
(e.g.,  governmental procurement programmes) instruments 
that address potential market failures related to innovation and 
technology diffusion. The section also assesses the cost-effectiveness 
of innovation policies as well as other policy assessment criteria 
introduced in Chapter 13.
Section  16.5 assesses the role of international cooperation in 
technology development and transfer, in particular the mechanisms 
established under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), but also other international initiatives for technology 
cooperation. The discussion on international cooperation includes 
information exchange, research, development and demonstration 
cooperation, access to financial instruments, intellectual 
property rights, as well as promotion of domestic capacities and 
capacity building.
Section  16.6 describes the role of technology in sustainable 
development, including unintended effects of technological changes, 
and synthesises the chapter.
Finally, Section  16.7 discusses gaps in knowledge emerging 
from this chapter.
16.2 Elements, Drivers and Modelling 
of Technology Innovation
Models of the innovation process, its drivers and incentives 
provide a  tool for technology assessment, constructing projections 
of technological change and identifying which macro conditions 
facilitate development of low-carbon technologies. The distinction 
between stages of the innovation process allows for assessment of 
technology readiness (Section 16.2.1). Qualitative and quantitative 
analysis of the main elements underpinning innovation  – research 
and development (R&D), learning by doing, and spillovers – allows 
for an explanation of past and projected future technological changes 
(Section 16.2.2). In addition, general purpose technologies can play 
a role in climate change mitigation.
In the context of mitigation pathways, the feasibility of any emission 
reduction targets depends on the ability to promote innovation 
in low- and zero-carbon technologies, as opposed to any other 
technology. For this reason, Section 16.2.3 reviews the literature of 
the levers influencing the direction of technological change in favour 
of low- and zero-carbon technologies. Moreover, representation of 
drivers in mathematical and statistical models from Section 16.2.2 
allows integration of its analysis with economic and climate effects 
within integrated assessment models (IAMs), hence permitting more 
precise modelling of decarbonisation pathways (Section 16.2.4).
In addition to technological innovation, other innovation approaches 
are relevant in the context of climate mitigation and more broadly 
sustainable development (Section  16.6). Frugal innovations, that 
is, ‘good enough‘ innovations that fulfil the needs of non-affluent 
consumers mostly in developing countries (Hossain 2018), are 
characterised by low costs, concentration on core functionalities, and 
optimised performance level (Weyrauch and Herstatt 2016) and are 
hence often associated with (ecological and social) sustainability 
(Albert 2019). Grassroots innovations are products, services 
and  processes developed to address specific local challenges and 
opportunities, and which can generate novel, bottom-up solutions 
responding to local situations, interests and values. (Pellicer-Sifres 
et al. 2018; Dana et al. 2021).
16.2.1 Stages of the Innovation Process
The innovation cycle is commonly thought of as having three 
distinct innovation phases on the path between basic research 
and commercial application: Research and development (R&D); 
demonstration; and deployment and diffusion (IPCC 2007). Each 
of these phases differs with respect to the kind of activity carried 
out, the type of actors involved and their roles, financing needs, and 
the associated risks and uncertainties. All phases involve a process 
of trial and error, and failure is common; the share of innovation 
that successfully reaches the deployment phase is small. The path 
occurring between basic research and commercialisation is not linear 
(Section 16.3); it often requires a long time and is characterised by 
significant bottlenecks and roadblocks. Furthermore, technologies 
may regress in the innovation cycle, rather than move forward (Skea et al. 2019). Successfully passing from each stage to the next 
one in the innovation cycle requires overcoming ‘valleys of deaths’ 
(Auerswald and Branscomb 2003; UNFCCC 2017), most notably the 
demonstration phase (Frank et al. 1996; Weyant 2011; Nemet et al. 
2018). Over time, new and improved technologies are discovered; 
this often makes the dominant technology obsolete, but this is not 
discussed in this report.
Table  16.2 summarises the different innovation stages and main 
funding actors, and maps phases into the technology readiness levels 
(TRLs) discussed in Section 16.2.1.4.
16.2.1.1 Research and Development
This phase of the innovation process focuses on generating 
knowledge or solving particular problems by creating a combination 
of artefacts to perform a particular function, or to achieve a specific 
goal. R&D activities comprise basic research, applied research 
and technology development. Basic research is experimental or 
theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge 
of the underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, 
without any particular application or use in view. Applied research is 
original investigation undertaken in order to acquire new knowledge, 
primarily directed towards a  specific, practical aim or objective 
(OECD 2015a). Importantly, R&D activities can be incremental – that 
is, focused on addressing a  specific need by marginally improving 
an existing technology  – or radical, representing a  paradigm shift, 
promoted by new opportunities arising with the accumulation of new 
knowledge (Mendonça et al. 2018). Technology development, often 
leading to prototyping, consists of generating a  working model of 
the technology that is usable in the real world, proving the usability 
and customer desirability of the technology, and giving an idea of 
its design, features and function (OECD 2015a). These early stages 
Table 16.2 | Stages of the innovation process (Section 16.2.1) mapped onto technology readiness levels (Section 16.2.1.4).  Source: adapted from Auerswald 
and Branscomb (2003), TEC (2017), IEA (2020a).
Stage Main funding actors Phases Related technology readiness levels (TRLs)
Research and 
developmentGovernments
FirmsBasic research  1 –  Initial idea (basic principles defined)
Applied research 
and technology 
development 2 –  Application formulated (technology concept and application of solution formulated)
 3 –  Concept needs validation (solutions need to be prototyped and applied)
 4 –  Early prototype (prototype proven in test conditions)
 5 –  Full prototype at scale (components proven in conditions to be deployed)
DemonstrationGovernments
Firms
Venture Capital
Angel investorsExperimental 
pilot project or 
full-scale testing 6 –  Full prototype at scale (prototype proven at scale in conditions to be deployed)
 7 –  Pre-commercial demonstration (solutions working in expected conditions)
 8 –  First-of-a-kind commercial (commercial demonstration, full-scale deployment in final form)
 9 –  Commercial operation in early environment (solution is commercial available, needs evolutionary 
improvement to stay competitive)


Deployment 
and diffusionFirms
Private equity
Commercial banks
Mutual fundsCommercialisation 
and scale-up
(business)
International organisations 
and financial institutions
Non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs)Transfer
of technological innovation are referred to as the ‘formative phase’, 
during which the conditions are shaped for a technology to emerge 
and become established in the market (Wilson and Grubler 2013) and 
the constitutive elements of the innovation system emerging around 
a  particular technology are set up (Bento and Wilson 2016; Bento 
et al. 2018) (Section 16.3).
The outcomes of R&D are uncertain: the amount of knowledge that 
will result from any given research project or investment is unknown 
ex ante (Rosenberg 1998). This risk to funders (Goldstein and 
Kearney 2020) translates into underinvestment in R&D due to low 
appropriability (Weyant 2011; Sagar and Majumdar 2014). In the case 
of climate mitigation technologies, low innovation incentives for the 
private sector also result from a negative environmental externality 
(Jaffe et al. 2005). Furthermore, in the absence of stringent climate 
policies and targets, incumbent fossil-based energy technologies are 
characterised by lower financing risk, are heavily subsidised (Davis 
2014; Kotchen 2021), and depreciate slowly (Arrow 1962a; Nanda 
et al. 2016; Semieniuk et al. 2021) (Section 16.2.3). In this context, 
public research funding plays a  key role in supporting high-risk 
R&D, both in developed and developing economies: it can provide 
patient and steady funding not tied to short-term investment returns 
(Kammen and Nemet 2007; Anadon et al. 2014; Mazzucato 2015a; 
Chan and Diaz Anadon 2016; Anadón et al. 2017; Howell 2017; 
Zhang et al. 2019) (Section 16.4). Public policies also play a role in 
increasing private incentives in energy research and development 
funding (Nemet 2013). R&D statistics are an important indicator 
of innovation and are collected following the rules of the Frascati 
Manual (OECD 2015a) (Section 16.3.3, Box 16.3 and Table 16.7).
16.2.1.2 Demonstration
Demonstration is carried out through pilot projects or large-scale 
testing in the real world. Successfully demonstrating a  technology 
shows its utility and that it is able to achieve its intended purpose and, 
consequently, that the risk of failure is reduced (i.e., that it has market 
potential) (Hellsmark et al. 2016). Demonstration projects are an 
important step to promote the deployment of low-carbon energy and 
industrial technologies in the context of the transition. Government 
funding often plays a large role in energy technology demonstration 
projects because scaling up hardware energy technologies is 
expensive and risky (Brown and Hendry 2009; Hellsmark et al. 2016). 
Governments’ engagement in low-carbon technology demonstration 
also signals support for businesses willing to take the investment 
risk (Mazzucato 2016). Venture capital, traditionally not tailored 
for energy investment, can also play an increasingly important role, 
thanks to the incentives (e.g., through de-risking) provided by public 
funding and policies (Gaddy et al. 2017; IEA 2017a).
16.2.1.3 Deployment and Diffusion
Deployment entails producing a technology at large scale and scaling 
up its adoption and use across individual firms or households in a given 
market, and across different markets (Jaffe 2015). In the context of 
climate change mitigation and adaptation technologies, the purposeful 
diffusion to developing countries, is referred to as ‘technology transfer’. 
Most recently, the term ‘innovation cooperation’ has been proposed to indicate that technologies needs to be co-developed and adapted 
to local contexts (Pandey et al. 2021). Innovation cooperation is an 
important component of stringent mitigation strategies as well as 
international agreements (Section 16.5).
Diffusion is often sluggish due to lock-in of dominant technologies 
(Liebowitz and Margolis 1995; Unruh 2000; Ivanova et al. 2018), as 
well as the time needed to diffuse information about the technologies, 
heterogeneity among adopters, the incentive to wait until costs fall 
even further, the presence of behavioural and institutional barriers, 
and the uncertainty surrounding mitigation policies and long-
term commitments to climate targets (Gillingham and Sweeney 
2012; Corey 2014; Jaffe 2015; Haelg et al. 2018). In addition, novel 
technology has been hindered by the actions of powerful incumbents 
who accrue economic and political advantages over time, as in the 
case of renewable energy generation (Unruh 2002; Supran and 
Oreskes 2017; Hoppmann et al. 2019).
Technologies have been shown to penetrate the market with a gradual 
non-linear process in a  characteristic logistic (S-shaped) curve 
(Grübler 1996; Rogers 2003). The time needed to reach widespread 
adoption varies greatly across technologies relevant for adaptation 
and mitigation (Gross et al. 2018); in the case of energy technologies, 
the time needed for technologies to get from a  10–90%  market 
share of saturation ranges between 5 to over 70 years (Wilson 2012). 
Investment in commercialisation of low-emission technology is largely 
provided by private financiers; however, governments play a key role 
in ensuring incentives through supportive policies, including R&D 
expenditures providing signals to private investors (Haelg et al. 2018), 
pricing carbon dioxide emissions, public procurement, technology 
standards, information diffusion and the regulation for end-lifecycle 
treatment of products (Cross and Murray 2018) (Section 16.4).
16.2.1.4 Technology Readiness Levels
Technology readiness levels (TRLs) are a categorisation that enables 
consistent, uniform discussions of technical maturity across different 
types of technology. They were developed by the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA) in the 1970s (Mankins 1995, 2009) 
and originally used to describe the readiness of components forming 
part of a technological system. Over time, more classifications of TRLs 
have been introduced, notably the one used by the European Union 
(EU). Most recently, the International Energy Agency (IEA) extended 
previous classifications to include the later stages of the innovation 
process (IEA 2020b) and applied it to compare the market readiness 
of clean energy technologies and their components (OECD 2015a; 
IEA 2020b). TRLs are currently widely used by engineers, business 
people, research funders and investors, often to assess the readiness 
of whole technologies rather than single components. To determine 
a TRL for a  given technology, a  technology readiness assessment 
(TRA) is carried out to examine programme concepts, technology 
requirements, and demonstrated technology capabilities. In the most 
recent version of the IEA (IEA 2020b), TRLs range from 1 to 11, with 

The purpose of TRLs is to support decision-making. They are applied 
to avoid the premature application of technologies, which would lead 
to increased costs and project schedule extensions (US Department 
of Energy 2011). They are used for risk management, and can also be 
used to make decisions regarding technology funding, and to support 
the management of the R&D process within a given organisation or 
country (De Rose et al. 2017).
In practice, the usefulness of TRLs is limited by several factors. These 
include limited applicability in complex technologies or systems, 
the fact that they do not define obsolescence, nor account for 
manufacturability, commercialisation or the readiness of organisations 
to implement innovations (European Association of Research 
Technology Organisations 2014) and do not consider any type of 
technology-system mismatch or the relevance of the products’ operation 
environment to the system under consideration (Mankins 2009). Many 
of these limitations can be eased by using TRLs in combination with 
other indicators such as system readiness levels and other economic 
indicators on, for example, investments and returns (IEA 2020b).
16.2.2 Sources of Technological Change
The speed of technological change could be explained with the 
key drivers of innovations process: R&D effort; learning by doing; 
and spillover effects. In addition, new innovations are sometimes 
enabled by the development of general purpose technologies, such 
as digitalisation.
16.2.2.1 Learning by Doing and Research and Development
Learning by doing and R&D efforts are two factors commonly 
used by the literature to explain past and projected future speed 
of technological change (Klaassen et al. 2005; Mayer et al. 2012; 
Bettencourt et al. 2013). Learning by doing is the interaction 
of workers with new machines or processes that allows more 
efficient use (Arrow 1962b). R&D effort is dedicated to looking for 
new solutions (e.g.,  blueprints) that could increase the efficiency 
of existing production methods or result in entirely new methods, 
products or services (Section 16.2.1.1).

postulates that learning by doing cannot continue forever without 
R&D because it is bounded by an upper physical productivity limit of 
an existing technology. R&D can shift this limit because it allows for 
replacing the existing technology with a new one. On the other hand, 
incentives to invest in R&D depend on the future cost of manufacturing, 
which in turn depends on the scale of learning by doing. The empirical 
evidence for virtuous circle between cost reduction, market growth and 
R&D were found in the case of the photovoltaic (PV) market (Watanabe 
et al. 2000) (Box 16.4), but could also lead to path dependency and 
lock-in (Erickson et al. 2015). Sections 16.4.4 and 13.7.3.1 discuss how 
simultaneous use of technology push and pull policies could amplify 
the effects of research and learning.
The benefits of R&D and learning by doing are larger at the economy 
level than at the firm level (Arrow 1962b; Romer 1990;). As a result, 
when left to its own, the market tends to generate less investment 
than socially optimal. For instance, if the cost of a  technology is 
too high before a large amount of learning by doing has occurred, 
there is a risk that it will not be adopted by the market, even if it 
is economically advantageous for the society. Indeed, initially new 
technologies are often expensive and cannot compete with the 
incumbent technologies (Cowan 1990). Large numbers of adopters 
could lower this cost via learning by doing to a  level sufficient to 
beat the incumbent technology (Gruebler et al. 2012). However, firms 
could hesitate to be the first adopter and bear the high cost (Isoard 
and Soria 2001). If this disadvantage overwhelms the advantages of 
being a first mover1 and if adopters are not able to coordinate, it will 
lead to situation of a lock-in (Gruebler et al. 2012).
The failure of markets to deliver the size of R&D investment and 
learning by doing that would be socially optimal is one of the 
justifications of government intervention. Policies to address these 
market failures can be categorised as technology-push and demand-
pull policies. The role of these policies is explained in Table 16.3.
Section 16.4 discusses individual policy instruments in greater detail.
Table  16.3 |  Categories of policies and interventions accelerating technological changes, the factors promoting them and slowing them down, 
illustrated with examples.
What it refers toWhat promotes 
technological changeWhat slows down 
technological changeExamples
Technology pushSupport the creation 
of new knowledge to 
make it easier to invest 
in innovationResearch and development 
(R&D), funding and performance 
of early demonstrations 
(Brown and Hendry 2009; 
Hellsmark et al. 2016)Inadequate supply of trained 
scientists and engineers 
(Popp and Newell 2012); 
gap with demand pull 
(Grübler et al. 1999b)Japan’s Project Sunshine, the US Project Independence in the 
1970s. Breakthrough Energy Coalition and Mission Innovation, 
respectively private- and public-sector international collaborations 
to respectively focus energy innovation and double energy R&D, 
both initiated concurrently with the Paris Agreement in 2015 
(Sanchez and Sivaram 2017)
Demand pullInstruments creating 
market opportunitiesEnlarging potential markets, 
increasing adoption of new 
fuels and mitigation technology
Digital innovations
Social innovation 
and awarenessWillingness of consumers to 
accept new technology
Policy and political volatility 
can deter investmentSubsidies for wind power California, the German feed-in tariff for 
photovoltaic, quotas for electric vehicles in China (F . Wang et al. 
2017) and Norway (Pereirinha et al. 2018)
Biofuels (Brazil)
Social innovation with wind energy (Denmark, Germany)
The size of the learning-by-doing effect is quantified in literature 
using learning rates, that is estimates of negative correlation between 
costs and size of deployment of technologies. The results from this 
literature include estimates for energy technologies (McDonald 
and Schrattenholzer 2001), electricity generation technologies 
(Rubin et al. 2015; Samadi 2018), for storage (Schmidt 2017), for 
end-of-pipe control (Kang et al. 2020) and for energy demand and 
energy supply technologies (Weiss et al. 2010). Meta-analyses find 
that learning rates vary across technologies, within technologies, 
and over time (Nemet 2009a; Rubin et al. 2015; Wei et al. 2017). 
Moreover, different components of one technology have different 
learning rates (Elshurafa et al. 2018). Central tendencies are around 
20% cost reduction for each doubling of deployment (McDonald and 
Schrattenholzer 2001).
Studies of correlation between cumulative deployment of 
technologies and costs are not sufficiently precise to disentangle 
the causal effect of increase in deployment from the causal effects 
of R&D and other factors (Nemet 2006). Numerous subsequent 
studies attempted to, among others issues, separate the effect 
of learning by doing and R&D (Klaassen et al. 2005; Mayer et al. 
2012; Bettencourt et al. 2013), economies of scale (Arce 2014), and 
knowledge spillovers (Nemet 2012). Once those other factors are 
accounted for, some empirical studies find that the role of learning 
by doing in driving down the costs becomes minor (Nemet 2006; 
Kavlak et al. 2018). In addition, the relation could reflect reverse 
causality: increase in deployment could be an effect (and not 
a  cause) of a  drop in price (Nordhaus 2014; Witajewski-Baltvilks 
et al. 2015). Nevertheless, in some applications, learning curves can 
be a useful proxy and heuristic (Nagy et al. 2013).
The negative relation between costs and experience is a reason to invest 
in a narrow set of technologies; the uncertainty regarding the parameters 
of this relation is the reason to invest in wider ranges of technologies 
(Fleming and Sorenson 2001; Way et al. 2019). Concentrating 
investment in narrow sets of technologies (specialisation) enables 
fast accumulation of experience for these technologies and large cost 
reductions. However, when the potency of technology is uncertain, one 
does not know which technology is truly optimal in the long run. The 
narrower the set, the higher the risk that the optimal technology will 
not be supported, and hence will not benefit from learning by doing. 
Widening the set of supported technologies would reduce this risk 
(Way et al. 2019). Uncertainty is present because noise in historical data 
hides the true value of learning rates, and due to unanticipated future 
shocks to technology costs (Lafond et al. 2018). Ignoring uncertainty 
in integrated assessment models implies that these model results are 
biased towards supporting a  narrow set of technologies, neglecting 
the benefits of decreasing risk through diversification (Sawulski and 
Witajewski-Baltvilks 2020).
16.2.2.2 Knowledge Spillovers
Knowledge spillovers drive continuous technological change (Romer 
1990; Rivera-Batiz and Romer 1991) and are for that reason relevant 
to climate technologies as well as incumbent, carbon-intensive 
technologies. Knowledge embedded in innovations by one innovator gives an opportunity for others to create new innovations and 
increase the knowledge stock even further. The constant growth of 
knowledge stock through spillovers translates into constant growth 
of productivity and cost reduction.
By allowing for experimenting with existing knowledge and combining 
different technologies, knowledge spillovers can result in the 
emergence of novel technological solutions, which has been referred 
to as ‘recombinant innovation’ (Weitzman 1998; Fleming and Sorenson 
2001; Olsson and Frey 2002; Tsur and Zemel 2007; Arthur 2009). 
Recombinant innovations speed up technological change by combining 
different technological solutions, and make things happen that would 
be impossible with only incremental innovations (van den Bergh 2008; 
Safarzyńska and van den Bergh 2010; Frenken et al. 2012). It has been 
shown that 77% of all patents granted between 1790 and 2010 in 
the USA are coded by a  combination of at least two technology 
codes (Youn et al. 2015). Spillovers related to energy and low-carbon 
technologies have been documented by a number of empirical studies 
(high confidence) (Popp 2002; Verdolini and Galeotti 2011; Aghion et al. 
2016; Witajewski-Baltvilks et al. 2017; Conti et al. 2018). The presence 
of spillovers can have both positive and negative impacts on climate 
change mitigation (high confidence).
The spillover effect associated with innovation in carbon-intensive 
technologies may lead to lock-in of fossil-fuel technologies. 
Continuous technological change of carbon-intensive industry raises 
the bar for clean technologies: a larger drop in clean technologies’ 
cost is necessary to become competitive (Acemoglu et al. 2012; 
Aghion et al. 2016). The implication is that delaying climate policy 
increases the cost of that policy (Aghion 2019).
On the other hand, the spillover effect associated with innovation 
in low-emission technologies increases the potency of climate policy 
(Aghion 2019). For instance, a policy that encourages clean innovation 
leads to accumulation of knowledge in clean industry which, through 
spillover effects, encourages further innovation in clean industries. 
Once the stock of knowledge is sufficiently large, the value of clean 
industries will be so high that technology firms will invest there, 
even without policy incentives. Once this point is reached, the policy 
intervention can be discontinued (Acemoglu et al. 2012).
In addition, the presence of spillovers implies that a  unilateral 
effort to reduce emissions in one region could reduce emissions 
in other regions (medium confidence) (Golombek and Hoel 2004; 
Gerlagh and Kuik 2014). For instance, in the presence of spillovers, 
a carbon tax that incentivises clean technological change increases 
the competitiveness of clean technologies not only locally, but also 
abroad. The size of this effect depends on the size of the spillovers. 
If they are sufficiently strong, the reduction of emissions abroad due 
to clean technological change could be larger than the increase of 
emissions due to carbon leakage (Gerlagh and Kuik 2014). Different 
types of carbon leakage are discussed in Chapter 13, Section 13.7.1, 
and other consequences of spillovers for the design of policy are 
discussed in Chapter 13, Section 13.7.3.
16.2.2.3 General-purpose Technologies and Digitalisation
General-purpose technologies (GPTs) provide solutions that could 
be applied across sectors and industries (Goldfarb 2011) by creating 
technological platforms for a  growing number of interrelated 
innovations. Examples of GPTs relevant to climate change mitigation 
are hydrogen and fuel cell technology, which may find applications 
in transport, industry and distributed generation (Hanley et al. 2018), 
and nanotechnology which played a significant role in advancement 
of all the different types of renewable energy options (Hussein 2015). 
Assessing the environmental, social and economic implications of 
such technologies, including increased emissions through energy 
use, is challenging (Section  5.3.4.1 and Cross-Chapter Box  11 in 
this chapter).
Several GPTs relevant for climate mitigation and adaptation emerged 
as a  result of digitalisation, namely the adoption or increase in 
the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) by 
citizens, organisations, industries or countries, and the associated 
restructuring of several domains of social life and of the economy 
around digital technologies and infrastructures (Brennen and 
Kreiss 2016; IEA 2017b). The digital revolution is underpinned by 
innovation in key technologies, for example, ubiquitous connected 
consumer devices such as mobile phones (Grubler et al. 2018), rapid 
expansions of global internet infrastructure and access (World Bank 
2014), and steep cost reductions and performance improvements in 
computing devices, sensors, and digital communication technologies 
(Verma et al. 2020). The increasing pace at which the physical and digital worlds are converging increases the relevance of disruptive 
digitalisation in the context of climate mitigation and sustainability 
challenges (European Commission 2020) (Cross-Chapter Box  11 in 
this chapter and Chapter 4, Section 4.4.1).
Digital technologies require energy, but increase efficiency, potentially 
offering technology-specific greenhouse gas (GHG) emission savings; 
they also have larger system-wide impacts (Kaack et  al. 2021). In 
industrial sectors, robotisation, smart manufacturing (SM), internet 
of things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and additive manufacturing 
(AM or 3D printing) have the potential to reduce material demand 
and promote energy management (Section 11.3.4.2). Smart mobility 
is changing transport demand and efficiency (Section 10.2.3). Smart 
devices in buildings, the deployment of smart grids and the provision 
of renewable energy increase the role of demand-side management 
(Serrenho and Bertoldi 2019) (Sections 9.4 and 9.5), and support the 
shift away from asset redundancy (Section 6.4.3). Digital solutions 
are equally important on the supply side, for example, by accelerating 
innovation with simulations and deep learning (Rolnick et  al. 
2021) or realising flexible and decentralised opportunities through 
energy-as-a-service concepts and particularly with pay-as-you-go 
(Section 15.6.8).
Yet, increased digitalisation could increase energy demand, thus 
wiping away potential efficiency benefits, unless appropriately 
governed (IPCC 2018a). Moreover, digital technologies could 
negatively impact labour demand and increase inequality (Cross-
Chapter Box 11 in this chapter).
Cross-Chapter Box 11 | Digitalisation: Efficiency Potentials and Governance Considerations
Authors: Felix Creutzig (Germany), Elena Verdolini (Italy), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Luisa F . Cabeza (Spain), María Josefina Figueroa 
Meza (Venezuela/Denmark), Kirsten Halsnæs (Denmark), Joni Jupesta (Indonesia/Japan), Şiir Kilkiş (Turkey), Michael König 
(Germany), Eric Masanet (the United States of America), Nikola Milojevic-Dupont (France), Joyashree Roy (India/Thailand), Ayyoob 
Sharifi (Iran/Japan)
Digital technologies impact positively and negatively on GHG emissions through: their own carbon footprint; technology 
application for mitigation; and induced larger social change. Digital technologies also raise broader sustainability 
concerns due to their use of rare materials and associated waste, and their potential negative impact on inequalities 
and labour demand.
Direct impacts emerge because digital technologies consume large amounts of energy, but also have the potential to 
steeply increase energy efficiency in all end-use sectors through material input savings and increased coordination 
(medium evidence, medium agreement) (Horner et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2016; IEA 2017b; Jones 2018). Global energy demand 
from digital appliances reached 7.14 EJ in 2018 (Chapter 9, Box 9.5), implying higher related carbon emissions. However, a small 
smartphone offers services previously requiring many different devices (Grubler et al. 2018). Demand for data services is increasing 
rapidly; quantitative estimates of the growth of associated energy demand range from slow and marginal to rapid and sizeable, 
depending the efficiency trends of digital technologies (Avgerinou et al. 2017; Vranken 2017; Stoll et al. 2019; Masanet et al. 2020) 
(Section 5.3.4.1). Renewable energy can serve as a low-carbon energy provider for the operation of a data centre, which in turn can 
provide waste heat for other purposes. Digital technologies can markedly increase the energy efficiency of mobility and residential 
and public buildings, especially in the context of systems integration (IEA 2020a). Reduction in energy demand and associated 
GHG emissions from buildings and industry, while maintaining service levels is estimated at 5 to 10%, with larger savings possible. 
Approaches include building energy management systems (BEMS), home energy management system (HEMS), demand response 
and smart charging (Cross-Chapter Box 11, Table 1). Data centres can also play a role in energy system management, for example, 
by increasing renewable energy generation through predictive control (Dabbagh et al. 2019), and by helping to drive the market for 
battery storage and fuel cells (Riekstin et al. 2014). Temporal and spatial scheduling of electricity demand can provide about 10 GW 
in demand response in the European electricity system in 2030 (Wahlroos et al. 2017, 2018; Koronen et al. 2020; Laine et al. 2020).
However, system-wide effects may endanger energy and GHG emission savings (high evidence, high agreement). Economic 
growth resulting from higher energy and labour productivities can increase energy demand (Lange et al. 2020) and associated GHG 
emissions. Importantly, digitalisation can also benefit carbon-intensive technologies (Victor 2018). Impacts on GHG emissions are 
varied in smart and shared mobility systems, as ride hailing increases GHG emissions due to deadheading, whereas shared pooled 
mobility and shared cycling reduce GHG emissions, as occupancy levels and/or weight per person km transported improve (Section 5.3). 
Energy and GHG emission impacts from the ubiquitous deployment of smart sensors and service optimisation applications in smart 
cities are insufficiently assessed in the literature (Milojevic-Dupont and Creutzig 2021). Systemic effects have wider boundaries of 
analysis, including broader environmental impacts (e.g., demand for rare materials, disposal of digital devices). These need to be 
Cross-Chapter Box  11, Table  1  | Selected sector approaches for reducing GHG emissions that are supported by new digital technologies. 
Contributions of digitalisation include a) supporting role (+), b) necessary role in mix of tools (++), c) necessary unique contribution (+++), but digitalisation may 
also increase emissions (−). (Chapters 5, 8, 9 and 11).
Sector ApproachQuantitative 
evidenceContribution of 
digitalisationSystems perspective 
and broader societal 
impactsReferences
Residential 
energy useNudges (feedback, 
information, etc.)2–4% reduction in 
global household 
energy use possible+ In combination with 
monetary incentives,  
non-digital informationNew appliances 
increase consumptionZangheri et al. (2019); Buckley 
(2020); Nawaz et al. (2020); 
Khanna et al. (2021)
Smart mobilityShared mobility 
and digital feedback 
(ecodriving)Reduction for shared 
cycling and shared 
pooled mobility; 
increase for ride 
hailing/ ride sourcing; 
reduction for ecodriving− or ++ Apps together with 
big data and machine learning 
algorithm key precondition for 
new shared mobilityRide hailing increases 
GHG emissions, especially 
due to deadheadingZeng et al. (2017);  
OECD and ITF (2020)
Smart citiesUsing digital 
devices and big 
data to make urban 
transport and building 
use more efficientPrecise data about 
roadway use can 
reduce material 
intensity and 
associated GHG 
emissions by 90%++ Big data analysis necessary 
for optimisationEfficiency gains are often 
compensated by more 
driving and other rebound 
effects; privacy concerns 
linked with digital 
devices in homesMilojevic-Dupont and Creutzig 
(2021) (Chapter 10, Box 10.1)
AgriculturePrecision agriculture 
through sensors and 
satellites providing 
information on soil 
moisture, temperature, 
crop growth and 
livestock feed levelsVery high potential for 
variable-rate nitrogen 
application, moderate 
potential for variable-
rate irrigation+ ICTs provide information 
and technologies which enables 
farmers to increase yields, 
optimise crop management, 
reduce fertilisers and 
pesticides, feed and water; 
increases efficiency of 
labour-intensive tasksThe digital divide is 
growing fast, especially 
between modern and 
subsistence farming;
Privacy and data may 
erode trust in technologiesDeichmann et al. (2016); 
Chlingaryan et al. (2018); 
Soto Embodas et al. (2019); 
Townsend et al. (2019)
IndustryIndustrial internet 
of things (IIoT)Process, activity and 
functional optimisation 
increases energy and 
carbon efficiency++ Increased efficiency
++ 1.3 GtCO 2-eq estimated 
abatement potential 
in manufacturing
+ Promote sustainable 
business modelsOptimisation in value 
chains can reduce 
wasted resourcesGeSI (2012); Wang et al. (2016); 
Parida et al. (2019);  
Rolnick et al. (2021)
Load 
management 
and battery 
storage 
optimisationBig data analysis for 
optimising demand 
management and 
using flexible load 
of appliances 
with batteriesReduces capacity 
intended for peak 
demand, shifts 
demand to align with 
intermittent renewable 
energy availability+ Accelerated experimentation 
in material science with artificial 
intelligence
++ / +++ Forecast and control 
algorithms for storage and 
dispatch managementFacilitate integration of 
renewable energy sources
Improve utilisation of 
generation assets
System-wide rebound 
effects possibleAkorede et al. (2010); 
Aghaei and Alizadeh (2013); 
de Sisternes et al. (2016); 
Voyant et al. (2017); Gür 
(2018); Hirsch et al. (2018); 
Sivaram (2018a); Vázquez-
Canteli and Nagy (2019) 
(Chapter 6, Section 6.4)Cross-Chapter Box 11 (continued)
integrated holistically within policy design (Kunkel and Matthess 2020), but they are difficult to quantify and investigate (Bieser and 
Hilty 2018). Policies and adequate infrastructures and choice architectures can help manage and contain the negative repercussions 
of systemic effects (Sections 5.4, 5.6 and 9.9).
Broader societal impacts of digitalisation can also influence climate mitigation because of induced demand for 
consumption goods, impacts on firms’ competitiveness, changes the demand for skills and labour, worsening of 
inequality – including reduced access to services due to the digital divide – and governance aspects (low evidence, 
medium agreement) (Sections 4.4, 5.3 and 5.6). Digital technologies expand production possibilities in sectors other than ICTs 
through robotics, smart manufacturing, and 3D printing, and have major implications on consumption patterns (Matthess and Kunkel 
2020). Initial evidence suggests that robots displace routine jobs and certain skills, change the demand for high-skilled and low-skilled 
workers, and suppress wages (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2019). Digitalisation can thus reduce consumers’ liquidity and consumption 
(Mian et al. 2020) and contribute to global inequality, including across the gender dimension, raising fairness concerns (Kerras et al. 
2020; Vassilakopoulou and Hustad 2021). Digital technologies can lead to additional concentration in economic power (e.g., Rikap 
2020) and lower competition; however, open source digital technologies can counter this tendency (e.g., Rotz et al. 2019). Digital 
technologies play a role in mobilising citizens for climate and sustainability actions (Segerberg 2017; Westerhoff et al. 2018).
Whether the digital revolution will be an enabler or a  barrier for decarbonisation will ultimately depend on the 
governance of both digital decarbonisation pathways and digitalisation in general (medium evidence, high agreement). 
The understanding of the disruptive potential of the wide range of digital technologies is limited due to their ground-breaking 
nature, which makes it hard to extrapolate from previous history/experience. Municipal and national entities can make use of digital 
technologies to manage and govern energy use and GHG emissions in their jurisdiction (Bibri 2019a,b) and break down solution 
strategies to specific infrastructures, building, and places, relying on remote sensing and mapping data, and contextual machine 
learning about their use (Milojevic-Dupont and Creutzig 2021). Mobility apps can provide mobility-as-a-service access to cities, ensuring 
due preference to active and healthy modes (Section 9.9 for the example of the Finnish city of Lahti). Trusted data governance can 
promote the implementation of local climate solutions, supported by available big data on infrastructures and environmental quality 
(Hansen and Porter 2017; Hughes et al. 2020). Governance decisions, such as taxing data, prohibiting surveillance technologies, or 
releasing data that enable accountability, can change digitalisation pathways, and thus underlying GHG emission (Hughes et al. 2020).
Closing the digital gap in developing countries and rural communities enables an opportunity for leapfrogging (medium 
evidence, medium agreement). Communication technologies (such as mobile phones) enable the participation of rural communities, 
especially in developing countries, and promote technological leapfrogging, for example, decentralised renewable energies and smart 
farming (Ugur and Mitra 2017; Foster and Azmeh 2020; Arfanuzzaman 2021). Digital technologies have sector-specific potentials and 
barriers, and may benefit certain regions/areas/socio-economic groups more than others. For example, integrated mobility services 
benefit cities more than rural and peripheral areas (OECD 2017).
Appropriate mechanisms also need to be designed to govern digitalisation as a megatrend (medium evidence, high 
agreement). Digitalisation is expected to be a  fast process, but this transformation takes place against entrenched individual 
behaviours, existing infrastructure, the legacy of time frames, vested interest and slow institutional processes, and requires trust from 
consumers, producers and institutions. A core question relates to who controls and manages data created by everyday operations (calls, 
shopping, weather data, service use, and so on). Regulations that limit or ban the expropriation and exploitation of behavioural data, 
sourced via smartphones, represent crucial aspects in digitalisation pathways, alongside the possibility to create climate movements 
and political pressure from the civil society. Governance mechanisms need to be developed to ensure that digital technologies such 
as AI take over ethical choices (Craglia et al. 2018; Rahwan et al. 2019). Appropriate governance is necessary for digitalisation to 
effectively work in tandem with established mitigation technologies and choice architectures. Consideration of system-wide effects 
and overall management is essential to avoid runaway effects. Overall governance of digitalisation remains a challenge, and will have 
large-scale repercussions on energy demand and GHG emissions.Cross-Chapter Box 11 (continued)
16.2.2.4 Explaining Past and Projecting Future 
Technology Cost Changes
Researchers and policymakers alike are interested in using observed 
empirical patterns of learning to project future reductions in costs 
of technologies. Studies cutting across a  wide range of industrial 
sectors (not just energy) have tried to relate cost reductions to 
different functional forms, including cost reductions as a function of 
time (Moore’s law) and cost reductions as a  function of production 
or deployment (Wright’s law, also known as Henderson’s law), finding 
that those two forms perform better than alternatives combining 
different factors, with costs as a function of production (Wright’s law) 
performing marginally better (Nagy et al. 2013). A comparison of expert 
elicitation and model-based forecasts of the future cost of technologies 
for the energy transition indicates that model-based forecast medians 
were closer to the average realised values in 2019 (Meng et al. 2021).
Recent studies attempt to separate the influence of learning by doing 
(which is a basis of Wright’s law) versus other factors in explaining 
cost reductions, specifically in energy technologies. Some studies 
explain cost reductions with two factors: cumulative deployment 
(as proxy for experience); and R&D investment – see the ‘two factor’ 
learning curve (Klaassen et al. 2005). However, reliable information 
on public energy R&D investments for developing countries is not 
systematically collected. Available data for OECD countries cannot be 
precisely assigned to specific industrial sectors or sub-technologies 
(Verdolini et al. 2018). Some learning-curve studies take into account 
that historical variation in technology costs could be explained by 
variation in key materials and fuel costs – for example, steel costs 
for wind turbines (Qiu and Anadon 2012), silicon costs (Nemet 2006; 
Kavlak et al. 2018) as well as coal and coal plant construction costs 
(McNerney et al. 2011). Economies of scale played a significant role in 
the PV cost reductions since the early 2000s (Yu et al. 2011) (Box 16.4), 
which can also become the case in organic PV technologies (Gambhir 
et al. 2016; Kavlak et al. 2018).
16.2.3 Directing Technological Change
Technological change is characterised not only by its speed, but also 
its direction. The early works that considered the role of technology 
in economic and productivity growth (Solow 1957; Nelson and Phelps 
1966) assumed that technology can move forward along only one 
dimension – every improvement led to an increase in efficiency and 
increased demand for all factors of production. This view, however, 
ignores the potency of technological change to alter the otherwise 
fixed relation between economic growth and the use of resources.
Technological change that saves fossil fuels could decouple economic 
growth and CO 2 emissions (Acemoglu et al. 2012, 2014; Hémous 
2016; Greaker et al. 2018). Saving of fossils could be obtained with 
increasing efficiency of producing alternatives to fossils (Acemoglu 
et al. 2012, 2014). This is the case of oil consumption by combustion 
engine cars which could be substituted with electric cars (Aghion 
et al. 2016). If there is no close substitute for a ‘dirty resource’, then 
its intensity in production could still be reduced by increasing the efficiency of the dirty resource relative to the efficiency of other 
inputs (Hassler et al. 2012; André and Smulders 2014; Witajewski-
Baltvilks et al. 2017). For instance, energy efficiency improvement 
leads to a drop in relative demand for energy (Hassler et al. 2012; 
Witajewski-Baltvilks et al. 2017).
16.2.3.1 Determinants of Technological Change Direction: 
Prices, Market Size and Government
Firms change their choice of technology upon change in prices: when 
one input (e.g.,  energy) becomes relatively expensive, firms pick 
technologies that allow them to economise on that input, according 
to price-induced technological change theory (Reder and Hicks 
1965; Samuelson 1965; Sue Wing 2006). For example, an increase 
in oil price will lead to a  choice of fuel-saving technologies. Such 
a response of technological change was evident during the oil-price 
shocks in the 1970s (Hassler et al. 2012). Technological change that 
is induced by an increase in price of a resource can never lead to 
an increase in use of that resource. In other words, rebound effects 
associated with induced technological change can never offset 
the saving effect of that technological change (Antosiewicz and 
Witajewski-Baltvilks 2021).
The impact of energy prices on the size of low-carbon technological 
change is supported by large number of empirical studies (Popp 
2019; Grubb and Wieners 2020). Studies document that higher 
energy prices are associated with a  higher number of low-carbon 
energy or energy efficiency patents (Newell et al. 1999; Popp 2002; 
Verdolini and Galeotti 2011; Noailly and Smeets 2015; Ley et al. 2016; 
Witajewski-Baltvilks et al. 2017; Lin and Chen 2019). Sue Wing (2008) 
finds that innovation induced by energy prices had a minor impact 
on the decline in US energy intensity in the last decades of the 20th 
century, and that autonomous technological change played a more 
important role. Several studies explore the impact of a carbon tax on 
green innovation (Section 16.4). However, disentangling the effect of 
policy tools is complex because the presence of some policies could 
distort the functioning of other policies (Böhringer and Rosendahl 
2010; Fischer et al. 2017) and because the impact of policies could be 
lagged in time (Antosiewicz and Witajewski-Baltvilks 2021).
The direction of technological change depends also on the market size 
for dirty technologies relative to the size of other markets (Acemoglu 
et al. 2014). Due to this dependence, climate and trade policy choices 
in a single region can alter the direction of technological change at 
the global level (Section 16.2.3.3).
The value of the market for clean technologies is determined not only 
by current profit, but also by a  firm’s expectation of future profits 
(Alkemade and Suurs 2012; Greaker et al. 2018; Aghion 2019). 
One implication is that bolstering the credibility and durability of 
policies related to low-carbon technology is crucial to accelerating 
technological change and inducing the private sector investment 
required (Helm et al. 2003), especially in the rapidly growing 
economies of Asia and Africa which are on the brink of making major 
decisions about the type of infrastructure they build as they grow, 
develop, and industrialise (Nemet et al. 2017).
If governments commit to climate policies, firms expect that the future 
size of markets for clean technologies will be large and they are eager 
to redirect research effort towards development of these technologies 
today. The commitment would also incentivise acquiring skills that 
could further reduce the costs of those technologies (Aghion 2019). 
However, historical evidence shows that policies related to energy 
and climate over the long term have tended to change (Taylor 2012; 
Nemet et al. 2013; Koch et al. 2016). Still, where enhancing policy 
durability has proven infeasible, multiple uncorrelated potentially 
overlapping policies can provide sufficient incentives (Nemet 2010).
16.2.3.2 Determinants of Direction of Technological Change: 
Financial Markets
The challenges of investing in innovation in energy when compared 
to other important areas, such as ICT and medicine are also reflected 
in the trends in venture capital funding. Research found that early-
stage investments in cleantech companies were more likely to fail 
and returned less capital than comparable investments in software 
and medical technology (Gaddy et al. 2017). This led to investors 
retreating from hardware technologies required for renewable energy 
generation and storage, and moving to software-based technologies 
and demand-side solutions (Bumpus and Comello 2017).
The preference for particular types of investments in renewable 
energy technologies depends on investors attitude to risk (Mazzucato 
and Semieniuk 2018). Some investors invest in only one technology, 
others may spread their investments, or invest predominantly in high-
risk technologies. The distribution of different types of investors will 
affect whether finance goes to support deployment of new high-risk 
technologies, or diffusion of more mature, less-risky technologies 
characterised by incremental innovations. The role of finance in 
directing investment is further discussed in Chapter 15, Section 15.6.2.
16.2.3.3 Internationalisation of Green Technological Change
A unilateral effort to reduce emissions (via a combination of climate, 
industrial and trade policies) in a  coalition of regions that are 
technology leaders will reduce the cost of clean technologies, and 
induce emissions reduction in the countries outside the coalition 
(Golombek and Hoel 2004; Di Maria and Smulders 2005; Di Maria 
and van der Werf 2008; Hémous 2016; van den Bijgaart 2017). 
The literature suggests various mechanisms leading to this result. 
Di Maria and van der Werf (2008) argue that the effort to reduce 
emissions in one region reduces global demand for ‘dirty goods’. This 
will redirect global innovation towards clean technologies, leading to 
a drop in the cost of clean production in every region.The model in Hemous (2016) predicts that such a coalition could 
induce acceleration of clean technological change through a mix 
of carbon taxation, clean R&D subsidies and trade policies in that 
region leading to reduction of cost of clean production inside the 
coalition. Export of goods produced with clean technologies to 
a region outside the coalition reduces demand for dirty goods in that 
region. In the model by van den Bijgaart (2017) local advancements 
of clean technologies by a coalition with strong R&D potential are 
imitated outside the coalition. Furthermore, advancements of clean 
technologies will incentivise future clean R&D outside the coalition 
due to intertemporal knowledge spillovers. In Golombek and 
Hoel (2004) an increase in environmental concern in one region 
increases abatement R&D in that region. Part of this knowledge 
spills over to other regions, increasing their incentive to increase 
abatement too, provided that the latter regions did not invest 
in abatement before.
However, this chain breaks if the regions that are behind the 
technological frontier (i.e., technological followers) are not able 
to absorb the solutions developed by regions at the frontier. New 
technologies might fail due to deficiencies of political, commercial, 
industrial, and financial institutions, which we list in Table  16.4. 
For instance, countries might not benefit fully from international 
knowledge spillovers due to insufficient domestic R&D investment, 
since local knowledge is needed to determine the appropriateness 
of technologies for the local market, adapting them, installing and 
using effectively (Gruebler et al. 2012). From the policy perspective, 
this implies that simple transfer of technologies could be insufficient 
to guarantee adoption of new technologies (Gruebler et al. 2012).
Research relying on patent citations has indicated that Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) is a  mechanism for firms to contribute to 
the recipient country’s innovation output as well as benefit from the 
recipient country in industrialised countries (Branstetter 2006) and 
in developing countries (Newman et al. 2015). However, insights 
specific for energy or climate change mitigation areas are not 
available, nor is there much information about how other innovation 
metrics may react to FDI.
Finally, technologies could be not efficient in developing countries, 
even if they are efficient in countries at the technological frontier. For 
instance, technologies that are highly capital intensive and labour 
saving will be efficient only in countries where costs of capital are 
low and costs of labour are high. Similarly, technologies which 
require a large number of skilled labour will be more competitive in 
a country where skilled labour is abundant (and hence cheap) than 
where it is scarce (Basu and Weil 1998; Caselli and Coleman 2006).
Table 16.4 | Examples of institutional deficiencies preventing deployment of new technologies in countries behind the technological frontier.
Institutions Examples of deficiencies Literature reference
Industrial Inability to benefit fully from international knowledge spillover due to insufficient domestic R&D investment Mancusi (2008); Unel (2008); Gruebler et al. (2012)
Commercial Insufficient experience with the organisation and management of large-scale enterprise Abramovitz (1986); Aghion et al. (2005)
Political Vested interests and customary relations among firms and between employers and employees Olson (1982); Abramovitz (1986)
Financial Financial markets incapable of mobilising capital for individual firms at large scale Abramovitz (1986); Aghion et al. (2005)
16.2.3.4 Market Failures in Directing Technological Change
Market forces alone cannot deliver Pareto optimal (i.e., social) 
efficiency due to at least two types of externalities: GHG emissions 
that cause climate damage; and knowledge spillovers that benefit 
firms other than the inventor. Nordhaus (2011) argues that these two 
problems would have to be tackled separately: once the favourable 
intellectual property right regimes (i.e., the laws or rules or regulation 
on protection and enforcement) are in place, a price on carbon that 
corrects the emission externality is sufficient to induce optimal level of 
green technological change. Acemoglu et al. (2012) demonstrates that 
subsidising clean technologies (and not dirty ones) is also necessary 
to break the lock-in of dirty technological change. Recommendations 
for technical changes are often based on climate considerations 
only and neglect secondary externalities and environmental costs of 
technology choices (such as loss of biodiversity due to inappropriate 
scale-up of bioenergy use). The scale of adverse side effects and 
co-benefits varies considerably between low-carbon technologies in 
the energy sector (Luderer et al. 2019).
16.2.4 Representation of the Innovation Process 
in Modelled Decarbonisation Pathways
A variety of models are used to generate climate mitigation 
pathways, compatible with 2°C and well below 2°C targets. 
These  include integrated assessment models (IAMs), energy 
system models, computable general equilibrium models, and agent 
based models. They range from global (Chapter 3) to national models 
and include both top-down and bottom-up approaches (Chapter 4). 
Innovation in energy technologies, which comprises the development 
and diffusion of low-, zero- and negative-carbon energy options, 
but also investments to increase energy efficiency, is a key driver of 
emissions reductions in model-based scenarios.
16.2.4.1 Technology Cost Development
Assumptions on energy technology cost developments is one of the 
factors that determine the speed and magnitude of the deployment 
in climate-energy-economy models. The modelling is informed by the 
empirical literature that estimates the rates of cost reduction for energy 
technologies. A first strand of literature relies on the extrapolation of 
historical data, assuming that costs decrease either as a power law 
of cumulative production, exponentially with time (Nagy et al. 2013) 
or as a function of technical performance metrics (Koh and Magee 
2008). Another approach relies on expert estimates of how future 
costs will evolve, including expert elicitations (Verdolini et al. 2018).
In these models, technology costs may evolve exogenously or 
endogenously (Mercure et al. 2016; Krey et al. 2019). In the first case, 
technology costs are assumed to vary over time at some predefined 
rate, generally extrapolated from past observed patterns or based 
on expert estimates. This formulation of cost dynamics generally 
underestimates future costs (Meng et al. 2021) as, among other things, 
it does not capture any policy-induced carbon-saving technological 
change or any spillover arising from the accumulation of national 
and international knowledge (Sections 16.2.2 and 16.2.3) or positive macroeconomic effects of a  transition (Karkatsoulis et al. 2016). 
The influence of cost and diffusion assumptions may be evaluated 
through sensitivity analysis. In the second case, costs are a function 
of a  choice variable within the model. For instance, technology 
costs decrease as a function of either cumulative installed capacity 
(learning by doing) (Seebregts et al. 1998; Kypreos and Bahn 2003) 
or R&D investments or spillovers from other sectors and countries.
One factor in this ‘learning by researching’ is applied to a wide range of 
energy technologies but also to model improvements in the efficiency 
of energy use (Goulder and Schneider 1999; Popp 2004). More complex 
formulations include two-factor learning processes (Criqui et al. 2015; 
Emmerling et al. 2016; Paroussos et al. 2020) (Section  16.2.2.1), 
multifactor learning curves (Kahouli 2011; Yu et al. 2011), or other drivers 
of cost reduction such as economies of scale and markets (Elia et al. 
2021). The application of two-factor learning curves to model energy 
technology costs is often constrained by the lack of information on 
public and/or private energy R&D investments in many fast-developing 
and developing countries (Verdolini et al. 2018). The approach used to 
model energy technology cost reductions varies across technologies, 
even within the same model, depending on the availability of data and/
or the level of maturity. Less mature technologies generally depend 
highly on learning by research, whereas learning by doing dominates 
in more mature technologies (Jamasb 2007).
In addition to learning, knowledge spillover effects are also 
integrated in climate-energy-economy models to reflect the fact that 
innovation in a given country depends also on knowledge generated 
elsewhere (Emmerling et al. 2016; Fragkiadakis et al. 2020). Models 
with a more detailed representation of sectors (Paroussos et al. 2020) 
can use spillover matrices to include bilateral spillovers and compute 
learning rates that depend on the human capital stock and the 
regional and/or sectoral absorption rates (Fragkiadakis et al. 
2020). Accounting for knowledge spillovers in the EU for PV, wind 
turbines, electric vehicles, biofuels, industry materials, batteries and 
advanced heating and cooking appliances can lead to the following 
results in a  decarbonisation scenario over the period 2020–2050 
as compared to the reference scenario: an increase of 1.0–1.4% in 
GDP , 2.1–2.3% in investment, and 0.2–0.4% in employment by clean 
energy technologies (Paroussos et al. 2017). When comparing two 
possible EU transition strategies – being a first-mover with strong 
unilateral emission reduction strategy until 2030 versus postponing 
action for the period after 2030  – endogenous technical progress 
in the green technologies sector can alleviate most of the negative 
effects of pioneering low-carbon transformation associated with loss 
of competitiveness and carbon leakage (Karkatsoulis et al. 2016).
16.2.4.2 Technology Deployment and Diffusion
To simulate possible paths of energy technology diffusion for different 
decarbonisation targets, models rely on assumptions about the cost of 
a given technology relative to the costs of other technologies, and its 
ability to supply the energy demand under the relevant energy system 
and physical constraints. These assumptions include, for example, 
considerations regarding renewable intermittency, inertia on technology 
lifetime (for instance, under less stringent temperature scenarios, early 
retirement of fossil plants does not take place), distribution, capacity 
and market growth constraints, as well as the presence of policies. 
These factors change the relative price of technologies. Furthermore, 
technological diffusion in one country is also influenced by technology 
advancements in other regions (Kriegler et al. 2015).
Technology diffusion may also be strongly influenced, either positively 
or negatively, by a number of non-cost, non-technological barriers or 
enablers regarding behaviours, society and institutions (Knobloch and 
Mercure 2016). These include network or infrastructure externalities, the 
co-evolution of technology clusters over time (‘path dependence’), the 
risk-aversion of users, personal preferences and perceptions and lack 
of adequate institutional framework which may negatively influence 
the speed of (low-carbon) technological innovation and diffusion, 
heterogeneous agents with different preferences or expectations, multi-
objectives and/or competitiveness advantages and uncertainty around 
the presence and the level of environmental policies and institutional 
and administrative barriers (Marangoni and Tavoni 2014; Baker et al. 
2015; Iyer et al. 2015; Napp et al. 2017; Biresselioglu et al. 2020; van 
Sluisveld et al. 2020). These types of barriers to technology diffusion are 
currently not explicitly detailed in most of the climate-energy-economy 
models. Rather, they are accounted for in models through scenario 
narratives, such as the ones in the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 
(Riahi et al. 2017), in which assumptions about technology adoption 
are spanned over a plausible range of values. Complementary methods 
are increasingly used to explore their importance in future scenarios 
(Turnheim et al. 2015; Geels et al. 2016; Doukas et al. 2018; Gambhir 
et al. 2019; Trutnevyte et al. 2019). It takes a very complex modelling 
framework to include all aspects affecting technology cost reductions 
and technology diffusion, such as heterogeneous agents (Lamperti 
et al. 2020), regional labour costs (Skelton et al. 2020), materials 
cost and trade and perfect foresight multi-objective optimisation 
(Aleluia Reis et al. 2021). So far, no model can account for all these 
interactions simultaneously.Another key aspect of decarbonisation regards issues of acceptability 
and social inclusion in decision-making. Participatory processes 
involving stakeholders can be implemented using several methods to 
incorporate qualitative elements in model-based scenarios on future 
change (van Vliet et al. 2010; Nikas et al. 2017, 2018; Doukas and 
Nikas 2020; van der Voorn et al. 2020).
16.2.4.3 Implications for the Modelling of Technical Change 
in Decarbonisation Pathways
Although the debate is still ongoing, preliminary conclusions indicate 
that integrated assessment models tend to underestimate innovation 
on energy supply but overestimate the contributions by energy 
efficiency (IPCC 2018b). Scenarios emerging from cost-optimal 
climate-energy-economy models are too pessimistic, especially in the 
case of rapidly changing technologies such as wind and batteries in 
the past decade. Conversely, they tend to be too optimistic regarding 
the timing of action, or the availability of a  given technology and 
its speed of diffusion (Shiraki and Sugiyama 2020). Furthermore, 
some technological and economic transformations may emerge as 
technically feasible from IAMs, but are not realistic if taking into 
account political economy, international politics, human behaviours, 
and cultural factors (Bosetti 2021).
There is a range of projected energy technology supply costs included 
in the IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Scenario Database 
(Box  16.1). Variations of costs over time and across scenarios 
are within ranges comparable to those observed in recent years. 
Conversely, model results show that limiting warming to 2°C or 
1.5°C will require faster diffusion of installed capacity of low-carbon 
energy options and a  rapid phase-out of fossil-based options. This 
points to the importance of focusing on overcoming real-life barriers 
to technology deployment.
Box 16.1 | Comparing Observed Energy Technology Costs and Deployment Rates with 
Projections from AR6 Global Modelled Pathways
Currently observed costs and deployment for electricity supply technologies from a variety of sources are compared with projections 
from two different sets of scenarios contained in the AR6 Scenario database: (i) scenarios that limit warming to 3°C (>50%) and 
scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%), and (ii) scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or lower (AR6 Scenarios Database). 
Global aggregate costs are shown for the following technologies: coal with carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS), gas with CCS, 
nuclear, solar PV, onshore and offshore wind.
The decrease in forecasted capital costs is not large compared to current capital costs for most technologies, and does not differ much 
between the two sets of scenarios (Box 16.1, Figure 1a). For offshore wind some of the models are more optimistic than the current 
reality (Timilsina 2020). Several sources of current solar PV costs report values that are at the low end of the AR6 Scenario Database. 
By 2050, the median technology cost forecasts decrease by between 5% for nuclear and 45–52% for solar (Box 16.1, Figure 1c).
Median values of renewables installed capacity increase with respect to 2020 capacity in scenarios that limit warming to 3°C (>50%) 
and in scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%) (Box 16.1 Figure 1b), where energy and climate policies are implemented in 
line with NDCs announced prior to COP26. More stringent targets (2°C) are achieved through a higher deployment of renewable 
technologies: by 2050 solar (wind) capacity is estimated to increase by a factor of 15 (10) (Box 16.1, Figure 1c). This is accompanied by 
an almost complete phase-out of coal (–87%). The percentage of median changes in installed capacity in scenarios that limit warming 
to 3°C (>50%) and in scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%)is within comparable ranges of that observed in the last decade. In 
the case of scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or lower, capacity installed is higher for renewable technologies and nuclear, 
and lower for fossil-based technologies (Box 16.1, Figure 1c).
Box 16.1 (continued)
The higher deployment in scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or lower cannot be explained solely as a result of technology 
cost dynamics. In IAMs, technology deployment is also governed by system constraints that characterise both 3°C (>50%) and 
4°C (>50%) scenarios, for example, the flexibility of the energy system, the availability of storage technologies. From a modelling point 
of view, implementing more stringent climate policies to meet the 2°C limit forces models to find solutions, even if costly, to meet 
those intermittency and flexibility constraints and temperature target constraints.
Box 16.1, Figure 1 | Global technology cost and deployment in two groups of AR6 scenarios: (i) scenarios that limit warming to 3°C (>50%) 
and scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%) (“Reference and current policies”), and (ii) scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or 
lower (“2°C and 1.5°C”).  Panel (a) Current capital costs are sourced from Table 1 (Timilsina 2020); distribution of capital costs in 2030 and 2050 (AR6 Scenarios 
Database). Blue symbols represent the mean. ‘Current’ capital costs for coal and gas plants with CCS are not available; Panel (b) Total installed capacity in 2019 (IEA 
2020c; IRENA 2020a, b); distribution of total installed capacity in 2030 and 2050 (AR6 Scenario Database). Blue symbols represent the mean; Panel (c) Percentage 
of change in capital costs and installed capacity between (2010–2020) and percentage of median change (2020–2030 and 2020–2050) (Median year–Median 2020)/
Median 2020*100. ‘M’ indicates the number of models, ‘S’ the number of scenarios for which this data is available. ‘Reference and current policies’ are scenarios that 
limit warming to 3°C (>50%) and scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%) (C6 and C7 AR6 scenario categories). ‘2C and 1.5C’ are scenarios that limit warming 
to 2°C (>67%) or lower (C1, C2 and C3 AR6 scenario categories). Each model may have submitted data for more than one model version.
16.3 A Systemic View of Technological 
Innovation Processes
The innovation process, which consists of a set of sequential phases 
(Section 16.2.1), is often simplified to a linear process. Yet, it is now well 
understood that it is also characterised by numerous kinds of interactions 
and feedbacks between the domains of knowledge  generation, 
knowledge translation and application, and knowledge use (Kline 
and Rosenberg 1986). Furthermore, it is not just invention that leads 
to technological change; the cumulative contribution of incremental 
innovations over time can be very significant (Kline and Rosenberg 
1986). Innovations can come, not just from formal research and 
development (R&D) but also sources such as production engineers 
and the shop floor (Kline and Rosenberg 1986; Freeman 1995).
This section reviews the literature focusing on innovation as a systemic 
process. This now predominant view enriches the understanding of 
innovation as presented in Section 16.2; it conceptualises innovation 
as the result of actions by, and interactions among, a large set of 
actors, whose activities are shaped by, and shape, the context in 
which they operate and the user group with which they are engaging. 
This section aligns with the discussion of socio-technical transitions 
(Section 1.7.3, Chapter 5 Supplementary Material, and Cross-Chapter 
Box 12 in this chapter).
16.3.1 Frameworks for Analysing Technological 
Innovation Processes
The resulting overarching framework that is commonly used in the 
innovation scholarship and in policy analyses is termed an ‘innovation 
system’, where the key constituents of the systems are actors, their 
interactions, and the institutional landscape, including formal rules, 
such as laws, and informal restraints, such as culture and codes of 
conduct, that govern the behaviour of the actors (North 1991).
One application of this framework, national innovation systems 
(NIS), highlight the importance of national and regional relationships 
for determining the technological and industrial capabilities and 
development of a  country (Lundvall 1992; Nelson 1993; Freeman 
1995). Nelson (1993) and Freeman (1995) highlight the role of institutions that determine the innovative performance of national 
firms as a  way to understand differences across countries, while 
Lundvall (1992) focuses on the ‘elements and relationships which 
interact in the production, diffusion and use of new, and economically 
useful, knowledge’ – that is, notions of interactive learning, in which 
user-producer relationships are particularly important (Lundvall 
1988). Building on this, various other applications of the ‘innovation 
system’ framework have emerged in the literature.
Technological innovation systems (TIS), with a technology or a set of 
technologies (more narrowly or broadly defined in different cases) as 
the unit of analysis, focus on explaining what accelerates or hinders 
their development and diffusion. Carlsson and Stankiewicz (1991) 
define a  technological system as ‘a dynamic network of agents 
interacting in a specific economic/industrial area under a particular 
institutional infrastructure and involved in the generation, diffusion, 
and utilisation of technology’. More recent work takes a ‘functional 
approach’ to TIS (Hekkert et al. 2007; Bergek et al. 2008), which 
was later expanded with explanations of how some of the sectoral, 
geographical and political dimensions intersect with technology 
innovation systems (Bergek et al. 2015; Quitzow 2015).
Sectoral innovation systems (SIS) are based on the understanding 
that the constellation of relevant actors and institutions will vary 
across industrial sectors, with each sector operating under a different 
technological regime and under different competitive or market 
conditions. A sectoral innovation, thus, can be defined as ‘that system 
(group) of firms active in developing and making a sector’s products 
and in generating and utilising a sector’s technologies’ (Breschi and 
Malerba 1997).
Regional innovation systems (RIS) and global innovation systems 
(GIS), recognise that the many innovation processes have a spatial 
dimension, where the development of system resources such as 
knowledge, market access, financial investment, and technology 
legitimacy may well draw on actors, networks, and institutions within 
a region (Cooke et al. 1997). In other cases, the distribution of many 
innovation processes are highly internationalised and therefore 
outside specific territorial boundaries (Binz and Truffer 2017). 
Importantly, Binz and Truffer (2017) note that the GIS framework 
‘differentiates between an industry’s dominant innovation mode... 
Table 16.5 | Functions that the literature identified as key for well-performing technological innovation systems.  Source: based on Hekkert et al. (2007) and 
Bergek et al. (2008).
Functions Description
Entrepreneurial activities and experimentation Entrepreneurial activities and experimentation for translating new knowledge and/or market opportunities into real-world application
Knowledge development Knowledge development includes both learning by searching and learning by doing
Knowledge diffusionKnowledge diffusion through networks, both among members of a community (e.g., scientific researchers) and across communities 
(e.g., universities, business, policy, and users)
Guidance of search Guidance of search directs the investments in innovation in consonance with signals from the market, firms or government
Market formationMarket formation through customers or government policy is necessary to allow new technologies to compete with 
incumbent technologies
Resource mobilisation Resource mobilisation pertains to the basic inputs – human and financial capital – to the innovation process
Creation of legitimacy/counteract  
resistance to changeCreation of legitimacy or counteracting resistance to change, through activities that allow a new technology to become accepted 
by users, often despite opposition by incumbent interests
Development of external economies Development of external economies, or the degree to which other interests benefit from the new technology
and the economic system of valuation in which markets for the 
innovation are constructed’.
The relevance of mission-oriented innovation systems (MIS), comes 
into focus with the move towards mission-oriented programmes as 
part of the increasing innovation policy efforts to address societal 
challenges. Accordingly, an MIS is seen as consisting of ‘networks of 
agents and sets of institutions that contribute to the development 
and diffusion of innovative solutions with the aim to define, pursue 
and complete a societal mission’ (Hekkert et al. 2020).
Notably the innovation systems approach has been used in a number of 
climate-relevant areas such as agriculture (Echeverría 1998; Horton and 
Mackay 2003; Brooks and Loevinsohn 2011; Klerkx et al. 2012), energy 
(Sagar and Holdren 2002; OECD 2006; Gallagher et al. 2012; Wieczorek 
et al. 2013; Darmani et al. 2014; Mignon and Bergek 2016), industry 
(Koasidis et al. 2020b) and transport (Koasidis et al. 2020a), and 
sustainable development (Anadon et al. 2016b; Clark et al. 2016; 
Bryden and Gezelius 2017; Nikas et al. 2020).
A number of functions can be used to understand and characterise 
the performance of technological innovation systems (Hekkert et al. 
2007; Bergek et al. 2008). The most common functions are listed in 
Table 16.5.
Evidence from empirical case studies indicates that all the above 
functions are important and that they interact with one another 
(Hekkert and Negro 2009). The approach therefore serves as both 
a rationale for and a guide to innovation policy (Bergek et al. 2010).
A much-used, complementary systemic framework is the Multi-Level 
Perspective (MLP) (Geels 2002), which focuses mainly on the diffusion 
of technologies in relation to incumbent technologies in their sector 
and the overall economy. A key point of MLP is that new technologies 
need to establish themselves in a stable ‘socio-technical regime’ and 
are therefore generally at a disadvantage, not just because of their 
low technological maturity, but also because of an unwelcoming 
system. The MLP highlights that the uptake of technologies in 
society is an evolutionary process, which can be best understood 
as a  combination of ‘variation, selection and retention’ as well as 
‘unfolding and reconfiguration’ (Geels 2002). Thus, new technologies 
in their early stages need to be selected and supported at the micro-
level by niche markets, possibly through a directed process that has 
been termed ‘strategic niche management’ (Kemp et al. 1998). As, 
at the landscape level, pressures on incumbent regimes mount, and 
those regimes destabilise, the niche technologies get a  chance to 
get established in a  new socio-technical regime. This allows these 
technologies to grow and stabilise, shaping a changed or sometimes 
radically renewed socio-technical regime. The MLP takes a systematic 
and comprehensive view about how to nurture and shape 
technological transitions by understanding them as evolutionary, 
multidirectional and cumulative socio-technical processes playing 
out at multiple levels over time, with a concomitant expansion in the 
scale and scope of the transition (Elzen et al. 2004; Geels 2005). There 
have been numerous studies that draw on the MLP to understand 
different aspects of climate technology innovation and diffusion 
(van Bree et al. 2010; Geels 2012; Geels et al. 2017).Systemic analyses of innovation have predominantly focused on 
industrialised countries There have been some efforts to use the 
innovation systems lens for the developing country context (Jacobsson 
and Bergek 2006; Altenburg 2009; Lundvall et al. 2009; Tigabu et al. 
2015; Tigabu 2018; Choi and Zo 2019) and specific suggestions on 
ways for developing countries to strengthening their innovation 
systems (e.g.,  by universities taking on a  ‘developmental’ role 
(Arocena et al. 2015), or industry associations acting as intermediaries 
to build institutional capacities (Watkins et al. 2015; Khan et al. 2020), 
including specifically for addressing climate challenges (Sagar et al. 
2009; Ockwell and Byrne 2016). But the conditions in developing 
countries are quite different, leading to suggestions that different 
theoretical conceptualisations of the innovation systems approach 
may be needed for these countries (Arocena and Sutz 2020), although 
a system perspective would still be appropriate (Boodoo et al. 2018).
16.3.2 Identifying Systemic Failures to Innovation 
in Climate-related Technologies
Traditional perspectives on innovation policy were mostly science-
driven, and focused on strengthening invention and its translation 
into application in a narrow sense. Also, a second main traditional 
perspective on innovation policy was focused on correcting for 
‘market failures’ (Weber and Truffer 2017) (Section 16.2). The more 
recent understanding of, and shift of focus to, the systemic nature 
on the innovation and diffusion of technologies has implications 
for innovation policy, since innovation outcomes depend not just 
on inputs such as R&D, but much more on the functioning of the 
overall innovation system (see Sections  16.3.1 and 16.4). Policies 
can therefore be directed at innovation systems components and 
processes that need the greatest attention or support. This may 
include, for example, strengthening the capabilities of weak actors 
and improving interactions between actors (Jacobsson et al. 2017; 
Weber and Truffer 2017). At the same time, a systemic perspective 
also brings into sharp relief the notion of ‘system failures’ (Weber 
and Truffer 2017).
Systemic failures include: infrastructural failures; hard (e.g.,  laws, 
regulation) and soft (e.g., culture, social norms) institutional failures; 
interaction failures (strong and weak network failures); capability 
failures relating to firms and other actors; lock-in; and directional, 
reflexivity, and coordination failures (Klein Woolthuis et  al. 2005; 
Chaminade and Esquist 2010; Negro et  al. 2012; Weber and 
Rohracher 2012; Wieczorek and Hekkert 2012). Most of the literature 
that unpacks such failures and explores ways to overcome them is on 
energy-related innovation policy. For example, Table 16.6 summarises 
a meta-study (Negro et al. 2012) that examined cases of renewable 
energy technologies trying to disrupt incumbents across a range of 
countries to understand the roles, and relative importance, of the 
‘systemic problems’ highlighted in Section 16.3.1.
Depending on the sector, specific technology characteristics, and 
national and regional context, the relevance of these systemic 
problems varies (Trianni et al. 2013; Bauer et al. 2017; Wesseling and 
Van der Vooren 2017; Koasidis et al. 2020a, b), suggesting that the 
innovation policy mix has to be tailor-made to respond to the diversity 
of systemic failures (Rogge et al. 2017). An illustration of how such 
systemic failures have been addressed is given in Box  16.2, which 
shows how the Indian government designed its standards and labelling 
programme for energy-efficient air conditioners and refrigerators. The success of this programme resulted from the careful attention to 
bring on board and coordinate the relevant actors and resources, the 
design of the standards, and ensuring effective administration and 
enforcement of the standards (Malhotra et al. 2021).
Table 16.6 | Examination of systemic problems preventing renewable energy technologies from reaching their potential, including number of case 
studies in which the particular ‘systemic problem’ was identified.  Source: Negro et al. (2012).
Systemic 
problemsEmpirical sub-categoriesNo. of 
cases
Hard institutions –‘Stop and go policy’: lack of continuity and long-term regulations; inconsistent policy and existing laws and regulations
 –‘Attention shift’: policymakers only support technologies if they contribute to the solving of a current problem
 –‘Misalignment’ between policies on sector level such as agriculture, waste, and on governmental levels, i.e., EU, national, regional level, etc.
 –‘Valley of Death’: lack of subsidies, feed-in tariffs, tax exemption, laws, emission regulations, venture capital to move technology from 
experimental phase towards commercialisation phase51
Market structures –Large-scale criteria
 –Incremental/near-to-market innovation
 –Incumbent’s dominance30
Soft institutions –Lack of legitimacy
 –Different actors opposing change28
Capabilities/
capacities –Lack of technological knowledge of policymakers and engineers
 –Lack of ability of entrepreneurs to pack together, to formulate clear message, to lobby to the government
 –Lack of users to formulate demand
 –Lack of skilled staff19
Knowledge 
infrastructure –Wrong focus or not specific courses at universities knowledge institutes
 –Gap/misalignment between knowledge produced at universities and what is needed in practice16
Too weak interactions –Individualistic entrepreneurs
 –No networks, no platforms
 –Lack of knowledge diffusion between actors
 –Lack of attention for learning by doing13
Too strong 
interactions –Strong dependence on government action or dominant partners (incumbents)
 –Networks allows no access to new entrants8
Physical infrastructure –No access to existing electricity or gas grid for renewable energy technologies
 –No decentralised, small-scale grid
 –No refill infrastructure for biofuels, hydrogen, biogas2
Box 16.2 | Standards and Labelling for Energy Efficient Refrigerators and Air Conditioners 
in India2
Energy efficiency is often characterised as a ‘low-hanging fruit’ for reducing energy use. However, systemic failures such as lack 
of access to capital, hidden costs of implementation, and imperfect information can result in low investments into adoption and 
innovation in energy efficiency measures (Sorrell et al. 2004). To address such barriers, India’s governmental Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency (BEE) introduced the Standards and Labelling (S&L) programme to promote innovation in energy efficient appliances in 

addressing systemic failures elsewhere too.
Programme design and addressing of early systemic barriers
To design the S&L programme, BEE drew on the international experiences and technical expertise of the Collaborative Labelling 
and Appliance Standards Program (CLASP) – a non-profit organisation that provides technical and policy support to governments in 
implementing S&L programmes. For example, since there was no data on the efficiency of appliances in the Indian market, CLASP 
assisted with early data collection efforts, resulting in a focus on refrigerators and air conditioners (McNeil et al. 2008).

(Malhotra et al. 2021).
Besides drawing from international knowledge, the involvement of manufacturers, testing laboratories, and customers was crucial for 
the functioning of the innovation system.
To involve manufacturers, BEE employed three strategies to set the standards at an ambitious yet acceptable level. First, BEE enlisted 
the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi (a public technical university) to engage with manufacturers and to demonstrate 
cost-effective designs of energy-efficient appliances. Second, BEE agreed to make the standards voluntary from 2006 to 2010. In 
return, the manufacturers agreed to mandatory and progressively more stringent standards starting in 2010. Third, BEE established 
a  multistakeholder committee with representation from BEE, the Bureau of Indian Standards, appliance manufacturers, test 
laboratories, independent experts, and consumer groups (Jairaj et al. 2016) to ensure that adequately stringent standards are 
negotiated every two years.
At this time, India had virtually no capacity for independent testing of appliances. Here, too, BEE used multiple approaches towards 
creating the actors and resources needed for the innovation system to function. First, BEE funded the Central Power Research Institute 
(CPRI) – a national laboratory for applied research, testing and certification of electrical equipment – to set up refrigerator and AC 
testing facilities. Second, they invited bids from private laboratories, thus creating a demand for testing facilities. Third, BEE developed 
testing protocols in partnership with universities. Australian standards for testing frost-free refrigerators were adopted until local 
standards were developed. Thus, once the testing laboratories, protocols and benchmark prices for testing were in place, the appliance 
manufacturers could employ their services.
Finally, a customer outreach programme was conducted from 2006 to 2008 to inform customers about energy-efficient appliances, to 
enable them to interpret the labels correctly, and to understand their purchase decisions and information sources (Jain et al. 2018; Joshi 
et al. 2019). BEE initiated a capacity-building programme for retailers to be an information source for customers. A comprehensive 
document with details of different models and labels was provided to retailers, together with a condensed booklet to be shared 
with customers.
Adapting policies to technologies and local context
While many of India’s standards and testing protocols were based on international standards, they needed to be adapted to the 
Indian context. For example, because of higher temperatures in India, the reference outside temperature of 32°C for refrigerators was 
changed to 36°C.
AC testing protocols also had to be adapted because of the emergence of inverter-based ACs. Existing testing done only at a single 
temperature did not value inverter-based ACs’ better average performance as compared to fixed-speed ACs over a range of temperatures. 
Thus, the Indian Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (ISEER) was developed for Indian temperature conditions in 2015 by studying 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards and through consultations with manufacturers (Mukherjee et al. 2020).
These measures had multiple effects on technological change. As a result of stringent standards, India has some of the most efficient 
refrigerators globally. In the case of ACs, the ISEER accelerated technological change by favouring inverter-based ACs over fixed-speed 
ACs, driving down their costs and increasing their market shares (BEE 2020).
Scaling up policies for market transformation
As the S&L programme was expanded, BEE took measures to standardise, codify and automate it. For example, to process a high 
volume of applications for labels efficiently, an online application portal with objective and transparent certification criteria was 
created. This gave certainty to the manufacturers, enabling diversity and faster diffusion of energy-efficient appliances. Thus by 2019, 
the programme expanded to cover thousands of products across 23 appliance types (BEE 2020).
Besides issuing labels, the enforcement of standards also needed to be scaled up efficiently. BEE developed protocols for randomly 
sampling appliances for testing. Manufacturers were given a fixed period to rectify products that did not meet the standards, failing 
which they would be penalised and the test results would be made public.Box 16.2 (continued)
16.3.3 Indicators for Technological Innovation
Assessing the state of technological innovation helps in understanding 
the progress of current efforts and policies in meeting stated 
objectives, and how we might design policies to do better.
Traditionally, input measures such as research, development and 
demonstration (RD&D) investments, and output measures such 
as scientific publication and patents were used to characterise 
innovation activities (Freeman and Soete 2009). This is partly because 
of the successes of specialised R&D efforts (Freeman 1995), the 
predominant linear model of innovation, and because such measures can (relatively) easily be obtained and compared. In the realm of 
energy-related innovation, RD&D investments remain the single 
most-used indicator to measure inputs into the innovation process 
(Box 16.3). Patent counts are a widely used indicator of the outputs 
of the innovation process, especially because they are detailed 
enough to provide information on specific adaptation and mitigation 
technologies. Mitigation and adaptation technologies have their own 
classification (Y02) with the European Patent Office (EPO) (Veefkind 
et al. 2012; Angelucci et al. 2018), which can be complemented with 
keyword search and manual inspection (Persoon et al. 2020; Surana 
et al. 2020b). However, using energy-related patents as an indicator of 
innovative activities is complicated by several issues (de Rassenfosse 
Box 16.3 | Investments in Public Energy Research and Development
Public energy R&D investments are a  crucial driver of energy technology innovation (Sections  16.2.1.1 and 16.4.1). Box  16.3, 
Figure 1 shows the time profile of energy-related RD&D budgets in OECD countries as well as some key events which coincided with 
developments of spending (IEA 2019). Such data on other countries, in particular developing countries, are not available, although 
recent evidence suggests that expenditures are increasing there (IEA 2020c). The IEA collected partial data from China and India in the 
context of Mission Innovation, but this is only available starting from 2014 and thus not included in Figure 1.
The figure illustrates two points. First, energy-related RD&D has risen slowly in the last 20 years, and is now reaching levels comparable 
with the peak of energy RD&D investments following the two oil crises. Second, over time there has been a reorientation of the 
portfolio of funded energy technologies away from nuclear energy. In 2019, around 80% of all public energy RD&D spending was 
on low-emission technologies – energy efficiency, carbon dioxide capture, use and storage, renewables, nuclear, hydrogen, energy 
storage and cross-cutting issues such as smart grids. A more detailed discussion of the time profile of RD&D spending in IEA countries, 
including as a share of GDP , is available in IEA (2020b).
25,000USD (2019 prices and exchange rates)Unallocated Other cross-cutting
technologies/researchOther power and 
storage technologiesHydrogen and 
fuel cells
Renewables Fossil fuels Energy efﬁciency Nuclear
0500010,00015,00020,000











2018Figure is same as TS.26
Box 16.3, Figure 1 | Fraction of public energy RD&D spending by technology over time for IEA (largely OECD) countries between 1974 and 2018.  
Sources: RD&D Database (2019), IEA (2019) (extracted on November 11, 2020).
Table 16.7 | Commonly used quantitative innovation metrics, organised by inputs, outputs and outcomes.  Sources: based on Sagar and Holdren (2002); 
Gallagher et al. (2006, 2011, 2012); Hekkert et al. (2007); Gruebler et al. (2012); Hu et al. (2018); Miremadi et al. (2018); Avelino et al. (2019).
Function Input indicators Output indicatorsOutcome 
indicatorsActors PoliciesStructural 
and systemic 
indicators
Knowledge 
developmentHigher education 
investments
Research and development 
(R&D) investments
Number of researchers
R&D projects over timeScientific publications
Highly-cited publications
Patents
New product 
configurationsNumber of technologies 
developed (proof-of-
concept/prototypes)
Increase in number 
of researchers
Learning ratesGovernments
Private corporations
UniversitiesResearch programmes and 
strategies
Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPR) policies
International technical 
norms (e.g., standards)
Higher education policiesWell-defined 
processes to define 
research priorities
Stakeholder 
involvement in 
priority-setting
Knowledge 
diffusionR&D networks
Number of research 
agreements
Number of research 
exchange programmes
Number of scientific 
conferencesCitations to literature  
or patents
Public-private  
co-publications
Co-patenting
Number of  
co-developed products
International scientific 
co-publications
Number of workshops and 
conferencesNumber of licensed 
patents
Number of technologies 
transferred
Knowledge-intensive 
services exports
Number of patent 
applications by 
foreigners
Number of researchers 
working internationallyGovernments
Private corporations
Scientific societies
UniversitiesDevelopment of 
communication centres
Facilitation of the 
development of networks
Open-access publication 
policies
IPR policies
International policy: 
e.g., treaties, clean 
development mechanismAccessibility to 
exchange programmes
Strength of 
linkage among key 
stakeholders
Participation 
to framework 
agreements
ICT accesset al. 2013; Haščič and Migotto 2015; Jaffe and de Rassenfosse 2017), 
including the fact that the scope of what are considered climate 
mitigation inventions is not always clear or straightforward.
Conversely, private energy R&D investments and investments by 
financing firms cannot be precisely assessed for a number of reasons, 
including limited reporting and the difficulty of singling out energy-
related investments. This inability to precisely quantify private 
investments in energy R&D leads to a patchy understanding of the 
energy innovation system, and how private energy R&D investments 
responds to public energy R&D investments. Overall, evidence shows 
that some of the industrial sectors that are important for meeting 
climate goals (electricity, agriculture and forestry, mining, oil and gas, 
and other energy-intensive industrial sectors) are investing relatively 
small fractions of sales on R&D (medium evidence, high agreement) 
(Jasmab and Pollitt 2005; Jamasb and Pollitt 2008; Sanyal and Cohen 
2009; European Commission 2015; American Energy Innovation 
Council 2017; Gaddy et al. 2017; National Science Board 2018).
Financing firms also play an important role in the energy innovation 
process, but data availability is limited. The venture capital (VC) 
financing model, used to overcome the ‘valley of death’ in the biotech 
and IT space (Frank et al. 1996), has not been as suitable for hardware 
start-ups in the energy space: for example, the percentage of exit 
outcomes in cleantech start-ups was almost half of that in medical 
start-ups, and less than a  third of software investments (Gaddy 
et al. 2017). The current VC model and other private finance do 
not sufficiently cover the need to demonstrate energy technologies 
at scale (Anadón 2012; Mazzucato 2013; Nemet et al. 2018). This 
greater difficulty in reaching the market compared to other sectors may have contributed to a reduction in private equity and venture 
capital finance for renewable energy technologies after the boom of 
the late 2000s (Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/BNEF 2019).
Quantitative indicators such as energy-related RD&D spending are 
insufficient for the assessment of innovation systems (David and 
Foray 1995): they only provide a partial view into innovation activities, 
and one that is potentially misleading (Freeman and Soete 2009). 
Qualitative indicators measuring the more intangible aspects of 
the innovation process and system are crucial to fully understand the 
innovation dynamics in a climate or energy technologies or sectors 
(Gallagher et al. 2006), including in relation to adopting an adaptive 
learning strategy and supporting learning through demonstration 
projects (Chan et al. 2017).
In Table  16.7, both quantitative and qualitative indicators for 
systemic innovation are outlined, using clean energy innovation 
as an illustrative example, and drawing on a broad literature base, 
taking into account both the input-output-outcome classification and 
its variations (Freeman and Soete 1997; Sagar and Holdren 2002; Hu 
et al. 2018), combined with the functions of technological innovation 
systems (Miremadi et al. 2018), while also being cognisant of the 
specific role of key actors and institutions (Gallagher et al. 2012). 
A specific assessment of innovation may focus on part of such a list of 
indicators, depending on what aspect of innovation is being studied, 
whether the analysis takes a  more or less systemic perspective, 
and the specific technology and geography considered. Similarly, 
innovation policies may be designed to specifically boost only some 
of these aspects, depending on whether a  given country/region is 
committed to strengthen a given technology or phase.
indicatorsActors PoliciesStructural 
and systemic 
indicators
Guidance 
of searchPolicy action plans and 
long-term targets
Shared strategies and 
roadmaps
Articulation of interest 
from lead customers
Expectations of markets/
profitsLevel of media coverage
Scenarios and 
foresight projectsBudget allocations
Mission-oriented 
innovation programmesGovernments
Interest groups
MediaTargets set by government 
for industry
Innovation policies
Credible political supportMedia strength
Resource 
mobilisationAccess to finance
Graduate in Science, 
Technology, Engineering, 
and Mathematics (STEM)
Gross expenditure on R&D/
total expenditure
Domestic credit to private 
sector
Number of researchers in 
R&D per capita
Public energy R&D 
expenditure/total 
expenditure
Expenditure on education
Investment in 
complementary assets 
and/or infrastructure 
(e.g., charging 
infrastructure for electric 
vehicles, smart grids)
Venture capital on dealsNumber of green projects/
technologies funded
Share of domestic credit 
granted to low-carbon 
technology projects
Share of domestic credit 
granted to projects 
developing complementary 
assets/infrastructureEmployment in 
knowledge-intensive 
activities
Employment in relevant 
industries
Scale of innovative 
activities
Rate of growth of 
dedicated investment
Availability of 
complementary assets 
and infrastructureGovernments
Private firms
Private investors 
(angel, venture 
capital, private 
equity)
BanksFinancial resources support
Development of innovative 
financing
International agreements 
(e.g., technology 
agreements)
Infrastructure support
Project/programme 
evaluation
Innovation policies
Higher education policies
Entrepreneurial 
activitiesNumber of new entrants
Percentage of clean energy 
start-ups/incumbents
Access to finance for 
cleantech start-upsSmall and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) 
introducing product or 
process innovation
Market introduction of new 
technological products
Number of new businesses
Experimental application 
projects
Creative goods exportsPrivate firms
Government
Risk-capital 
providers
PhilanthropistsEase of starting a business
Risk-capital policies
Start-up support 
programmes
Incubator programmesStart-up support 
services
Market 
formationPublic market support
High-tech importsMarket penetration of new 
technologies
Increase in 
installed capacity
Number of niche markets
Number of technologies 
commercialisedEnvironmental 
performance
Level of environmental 
impact on society
Renewable energy jobs
Renewable energy 
production
Trade of energy 
technology 
and equipment
High-tech exportsPrivate firms
Governments
institutions 
regulating trade, 
finance, investment, 
environment, 
development, 
security, and health 
issuesEnvironmental and energy 
regulation
Fiscal and financial 
incentives
Cleantech-friendly policy 
processes
Transparency
Specific tax regimesResource endowments
Attractiveness of 
renewable energy 
infrastructure
Coordination across 
relevant actors 
(e.g., renewable 
energy producers, 
grid operators, 
and distribution 
companies)
Creation of 
legitimacyYouth and public 
demonstration
Lobbying activities
Regulatory acceptance and 
integration
Technology supportLevel of discussion/
debate among key 
stakeholders (public, firms, 
policymakers, etc.)
Greater recognition 
of benefitsPublic opinion
Policymaker opinion
Executive opinion 
on regulation
Environmental 
standards and 
certificationGovernments
Stakeholders
Citizens
PhilanthropistsRegulatory quality
Regulatory instruments
Political consistencyParticipatory 
processes
The systemic approach to innovation and transition dynamics (Cross-
Chapter Box 12 in this chapter) has advanced our understanding of 
the complexity of the innovation process, pointing to the importance 
of assessing the efficiency and effectiveness in producing, diffusing 
and exploiting knowledge  (Lundvall 1992), including how the 
existing stock of knowledge may be recombined and used for new 
applications (David and  Foray 1995). There remains a  crucial need 
for more relevant and comprehensive approaches of assessing 
innovation (Freeman and Soete 2009; Dziallas and Blind 2019). 
In the context of climate mitigation, innovation is a means to an end; 
therefore, there is the need to consider the processes by which the 
output of innovation (e.g.,  patents) are translated into real-world 
outcomes (e.g.,  deployment of low-carbon technologies) (Freeman 
and Soete 1997; Sagar and Holdren 2002). Currently, there is no 
available set of quantitative metrics that, collectively, can help get 
a  picture of innovation in a  particular energy technology or set 
of energy technologies. Also we are still lacking an understanding of  
how to systematically use qualitative indicators to characterise the 
more intangible aspects of the energy innovation system and to 
improve front-end innovation decisions (Dziallas and Blind 2019).16.3.4 Emerging Policy Perspectives 
on Systemic Transformations
Because of the multiple market, government, system, and other 
failures that are associated with the energy system, a range of policy 
interventions are usually required to enable the development and 
introduction of new technologies in the market (Jaffe et  al. 2005; 
Bürer and Wüstenhagen 2009; Negro et  al. 2012; Twomey 2012; 
Veugelers 2012; Weber and Rohracher 2012) used in what is termed 
as ‘policy mixes’ (Rogge and Reichardt 2016; Edmondson et al. 2019, 
2020; Rogge et al. 2020). Empirical research shows that, in the energy 
and environment space, when new technologies were developed and 
introduced in the market, it was usually at least partly as a  result 
of a  range of policies that shaped the socio-technical system 
(robust evidence, high agreement) (Bunn et al. 2014; Bergek et al. 
2015; Rogge and Reichardt 2016; Nemet 2019). An example of this 
systemic and dynamic nature of policies is the 70-year innovation 
journey of solar photovoltaic (PV), covering multiple countries, which 
is reviewed in Box 16.4.
Box 16.4 | Sources of Cost Reductions in Solar Photovoltaics
No single country persisted in developing solar photovoltaic (PV): five countries each made a  distinct contribution, 
with each leader relinquishing its lead. The free flow of ideas, people, machines, finance, and products across countries 
explains the success of solar PVs. Barriers to knowledge flow delay innovation.
Solar PV has attracted interest for decades, and until recently was seen as an intriguing novelty, serving a niche, but widely dismissed 
as a serious answer to climate change and other social problems associated with energy use. Since the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment 
Report (AR5), PV has become a substantial global industry – a truly disruptive technology that has generated trade disputes among 
superpowers, threatened the solvency of large energy companies, and prompted reconsideration of electric utility regulation rooted in 
the 1930s. More favourably, its continually falling costs and rapid adoption are improving air quality and facilitating climate change 
mitigation. PV is now so inexpensive that it is important in an expanding set of countries. In 2020, 41 countries, in six continents, had 
each installed at least 1GW of solar (IRENA 2020a).
The cost of generating electricity from solar PV is now lower in sunny locations than running existing fossil fuel power plants (IEA 
2020c) (Chapter 6). Prices in 2020 were below where even the most optimistic experts expected they would be in 2030.
The costs of solar PV modules have fallen by more than a factor of 10,000 since they were first commercialised in 1957. This four 
orders of magnitude cost reduction from the first commercial application in 1958 until 2018 can be summarised as the result of 
distinct contributions by the USA, Japan, Germany, Australia, and China – in that sequence (Green 2019; Nemet 2019). As shown in 
Box 16.4, Figure 1, PV improved as the result of:
i. scientific contributions in the 1800s and early 1900s, in Europe and the USA, that provided a fundamental understanding of the 
ways that light interacts with molecular structures, leading to the development of the p-n junction to separate electrons and holes 
(Einstein 1905; Ohl 1941);
ii. a breakthrough at a corporate laboratory in the USA in 1954 that made a commercially available PV device available and led to 
the first substantial orders, by the US Navy in 1957 (Ohl 1946; Gertner 2013);
iii. a government R&D and public procurement effort in the 1970s in the USA, that enlisted skilled scientists and engineers into the 
effort and stimulated the first commercial production lines (Christensen 1985; Blieden 1999; Laird 2001);
iv. Japanese electronic conglomerates, with experience in semiconductors, serving niche markets in the 1980s and in 1994 launching 
the world’s first major rooftop subsidy programme, with a declining rebate schedule, and demonstrating there was substantial 
consumer demand for PV (Kimura and Suzuki 2006);
v. Germany passing a feed-in tariff in 2000 that quadrupled the market for PV, catalysing development of PV-specific production 
equipment that automated and scaled PV manufacturing (RESA 2001; Lauber and Jacobsson 2016);
vi. Chinese entrepreneurs, almost all trained in Australia and using Australian-invented passivated emitter rear cell technology, 
building supply chains and factories of gigawatt scale in the 2000s. China became the world’s leading installer of PVs from 2013 
onward (Quitzow 2015; Helveston and Nahm 2019); and
vii. a cohort of adopters with high willingness to pay, accessing information from neighbours, and installer firms that learnt from their 
installation experience as well as that of their competitors, to lower soft costs (Ardani and Margolis 2015; Gillingham et al. 2016).
As this evolution makes clear, no individual country persisted in leading the technology, and every world-leading firm lost its lead 
within a few years (Green 2019). Solar followed an overlapping but sequential process of technology creation, market creation and 
cost reduction (comparable to emergence, early adoption, diffusion and stabilisation in Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter). In the 
technology creation phase, examples of central processes include flows of knowledge from one person to another, between firms, 
and between countries as well as US and Japanese R&D funding in the 1970s and early 1980s. During market creation, PVs modular 
scale allowed it to serve a variety of niche markets from satellites in the 1950s to toys in the 1980s, when Germany transformed 
the industry from niche to mass market with its subsidy programme that began in 2000 and became important for PV in 2004. The 
dramatic increase in size combined with its 20-year guaranteed contracts reduced risk for investors and created confidence in PV’s 
long-term growth. Supportive policies also emerged outside Germany, in Spain, Italy, California, and China, which spread the risk, 
even as national policy support was more volatile. Rapid and deep cost reductions were made possible by: learning by doing in the 
process of operating, optimising, and combining production equipment; investing and improving each manufacturing line to gradually 
scale up to massive sizes; and incremental improvements in the PV devices themselves.
Central to PV development has been its modularity, which provided two distinct advantages: access to niche markets, and iterative 
improvement. Solar has been deployed as a commercial technology across nine orders of magnitude: from a 1W cell in a calculator to 
a 1GW plant in the Egyptian desert, and almost every scale in between. This modular scale enabled PV to serve a sequence of policy-
independent niche markets (such as satellites and telecoms applications), which generally increased in size and decreased in willingness 
to pay, in line with the technology cost reductions. This modular scale also enabled a large number of iterations, such that in 2020 
over three billion solar panels had been produced. Compared to, for instance, approximately 1000 nuclear reactors that were ever 
constructed, a million times more opportunities for learning by doing were available to solar PV: to make incremental improvements, 
to introduce new manufacturing equipment, to optimise that equipment, and to learn from failures. More generally, recent work has 
pointed to the benefits of modularity in the speed of adoption (Wilson et al. 2020) and learning rates (Sweerts et al. 2020).
While many technologies do not fit into the solar model, some – including micro nuclear reactors and direct air capture – also have modular 
characteristics that make them suitable for following solar’s path and benefit from solar’s drivers. However, it took solar PV 60 years to 
become cheap, which is too slow for addressing climate change if a technology is now still at the lab scale. A challenge in learning from 
the solar model is therefore how to use public policy to speed up innovation over much shorter time frames, for example, 15 or fewer years.Box 16.4 (continued)
$10$100$1000$10,000$100,000

Box 16.4, Figure 1 | Milestones in the development of low-cost solar photovoltaics.  Source: Nemet (2019).
There are many definitions of policy mixes from various disciplines 
(Rogge et al. 2017), including environmental economics (Lehmann 
2012), policy studies (Kern and Howlett 2009) and innovation 
studies. Generally speaking, a  policy mix can be characterised by 
a combination of building blocks, namely elements, processes and 
characteristics, which can be specified using different dimensions 
(Rogge and Reichardt 2016). Elements include: (i) the policy 
strategy with its objectives and principal plans; (ii) the mix of 
policy instruments; and (iii) instrument design. The content of 
these elements is the result of policy processes. Both elements and 
processes can be described by their characteristics in terms of the 
consistency of the elements, the coherence of the processes, and 
the credibility and comprehensiveness of the policy mix in different 
policy, governance, geography and temporal context (Rogge and 
Reichardt 2016). Other aspects in the evaluation of policy mixes 
include framework conditions, the type of policy instrument and the 
lower level of policy granularity, namely design elements or design 
features (del Río 2014; del Río and Cerdá 2017). In addition, many 
have argued for the need to craft policies that affect different actors 
in the transition, some supporting and some ‘destabilising’ (Geels 
2002; Kivimaa and Kern 2016).
Learning from the innovation systems literature, some of the 
recent policy focus is not only directed on innovation policies 
that can optimise the innovation system to improve economic 
competitiveness and growth, but also policies that can induce 
strategic directionality and guide processes of transformative 
changes towards desired societal objectives (Mitcham 2003; Steneck 
2006). Therefore, the aim is to connect innovation policy with societal 
challenges and transformative changes through engagement with 
a  variety of actors and ideas and incorporating equity, nowadays 
often referred to as a ‘just transition’ (Newell and Mulvaney 2013; 
Swilling et al. 2016; Heffron and McCauley 2018; Jasanoff 2018) 
(Chapters 1 and 17). This new policy paradigm is opening up a new 
discursive space, shaping policy outcomes, and giving rise to the 
emerging idea of transformative innovation policy (Fagerberg 2018; 
Diercks et al. 2019).
Transformative innovation policy has a broader coverage of the 
innovation process with a  much wider participation of actors, 
activities and modes of innovation. It is often expressed as socio-
technical transitions (Elzen et al. 2004; Turnheim and Sovacool 
2020) or societal transformations (Scoones 2015; Roberts et al. 
2018). Transformative innovation policy encompasses different 
ideas and concepts that aim to address the societal challenges 
involving a  variety of discussions, including social innovation 
(Mulgan 2012), complex adaptive systems (Gunderson and 
Holling 2002), eco-innovation (Kemp 2011) and a framework for 
responsible innovation (Stilgoe et al. 2013), value-sensitive design 
(Friedman and Hendry 2019) and social-technical integration 
(Fisher et al. 2006).16.4 Innovation Policies and Institutions
Building on the frameworks for identifying market failures 
(Section 16.2) and systemic failures (Section 16.3) in the innovation 
system for climate-related technologies, Section  16.4 proceeds as 
follows. First, it considers some of the policy instruments introduced 
in Chapter 13 that are particularly relevant for the pace and direction 
of innovation in technologies for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation. Second, it explains why governments put in place 
policies to promote innovation in climate-related technologies. 
Third, it takes stock of the overall empirical and theoretical evidence 
regarding the relationship between policy instruments with a direct 
and an indirect impact on innovation outcomes (including intellectual 
property regimes) and also other outcomes (competitiveness and 
distributional outcomes). Fourth, it assesses the evidence on the 
impact of trade-related policies and of sub-national policies aiming 
to develop cleantech industrial clusters.
This section focuses on innovation policies and institutions which are 
implemented at the national level. Whenever relevant, this section 
highlights examples of policies or initiatives that delve more deeply 
into the main high-level sectors: power, transport, industry, buildings, 
and agriculture, forestry and other land-use (AFOLU). Whenever 
possible, this section also discusses issues in policy selection, design, 
and implementation that have been identified as more relevant in 
developing countries and emerging economies.
Overall, this section shows that national and subnational policies 
and institutions are one of the main factors determining the 
redirection and acceleration of technological innovation and low-
emission technological change (Anadon et al. 2016b; Rogge and 
Reichardt 2016; Åhman et al. 2017; Anadón et al. 2017; Roberts 
et al. 2018) (robust evidence, high agreement). Both technology 
push (e.g., scientific training, research and development (R&D)) and 
demand pull (e.g., economic and fiscal support and regulatory policy 
instruments), as well as instruments promoting knowledge flows and 
especially research-firm technology transfer, can be part of the mix 
(robust evidence, medium agreement) (Sections 16.2 and 16.3).
Public R&D investments in energy and climate-related technologies 
have a positive impact on innovation outcomes (medium evidence, 
high agreement). The evidence on procurement is generally positive, 
but limited. The economic policy instruments that can be classified 
as market pull instruments when it comes to the competitiveness 
outcome (at least in the short term) is more mixed. The review of the 
literature in this section shows that market pull policy instruments 
had positive but also some negative impacts on outcomes in some 
instances on some aspects of competitiveness and distributional 
outcomes (medium evidence, medium agreement) (Peñasco et al. 
2021). For several of them – such as carbon taxes or feed-in tariffs – 
the evidence of a positive impact on innovation is more consistent 
than the others. Evidence suggests that complementary policies 
or improved policy design can mitigate such short-term negative 
distributional impacts.
16.4.1 Overview of Policy Instruments for Climate 
Technology Innovation
Government policies can influence changes in technologies, as well 
as changes to the systems they support (Somanathan et al. 2014) 
(Chapter 13 and Sections 16.2 and 16.3).
Technology-push policy instruments stimulate innovation by increasing 
the supply of new knowledge through funding  and  performing 
research; increasing the supply of trained scientists and engineers 
which contribute to knowledge-generation and provide technological 
opportunities, which private firms can decide to commercialise 
(Mowery and Rosenberg 1979; Anadon and Holdren 2009; Nemet 
2009b; Mazzucato 2013).
Governments can also stimulate technological change through 
demand-pull (or market-pull) instruments which support market 
creation or expansion and technology transfer, and thus promote 
learning by doing, economies of scale, and automation (Section 16.2). 
Demand-pull policy instruments include regulation, carbon prices, 
subsidies that reduce the cost of adoption, public procurement, 
and intellectual property regulation. Typically, technology push is 
especially important for early-stage technologies, characterised 
by higher uncertainty and lower appropriability (Section  16.2); 
demand-pull instruments become more relevant in the later stages 
of the innovation process (Mowery and Rosenberg 1979; Anadon and 
Holdren 2009; Nemet 2009b) (Section 16.2).The second column of Table  16.8 summarises the set of policies 
shaping broader climate outcomes over the past few decades in many 
countries outlined in Chapter 13, Section 13.6, which groups them 
into economic and financial, regulatory, and soft instruments. Other 
policies, such as monetary, banking and trade policies, for instance, can 
also shape innovation, but most government action to shape energy 
has not focused on them. As Table 16.8 shows, this section discusses 
the set of policy instruments on innovation outcomes, or a  subset 
of the ‘Transformative Potential’ criterion presented in Chapter 13, 
and thus complements the more general discussion presented there. 
Table 16.8 specifically prioritises the impact of the subset of policy 
instruments on innovation outcomes for which evidence is available. 
This focus is complemented by a  discussion of the impact of the 
same policy instruments on competitiveness (a subcomponent of the 
economic effectiveness evaluation criterion) and on distributional 
outcomes. Many of the policy instrument types listed in Table 16.8 
have been implemented or proposed to address the different types of 
market or systemic failures or bottlenecks described in Sections 16.2 
and 16.3 (OECD 2011a).
Section  16.3 characterised technological innovation as a  systemic, 
non-linear and dynamic process. Figure 16.1 below presents a stylised 
(and necessarily incomplete) view connecting the innovation process 
stages presented in Section  16.2, some of the key mechanisms in 
technology innovation systems, and some of the decarbonisation 
policy instruments that have been assessed in terms of their impact 
on technological innovation outcomes in Section  16.4.4. As noted 
in the caption and discussed in Section  16.4.4, regulatory policy 
instruments also shape the early stages of technology development.
Table 16.8 | Overview of policy instrument types covered in Chapter 13 and their correspondence to the subset of policy instrument types reviewed in 
Chapter 16 with a focus on innovation outcomes.
 High-level 
categorisationLower-level policy instrument type in Chapter 13Policy instrument types reviewed in Section 16.4 
(for definitions see Peñasco et al. 2021)
Economic or financial 
policy instrument typesResearch and development (R&D) investments R&D investments (including demonstration) (Box 16.3)
Subsidies for mitigationFeed-in tariffs or premia (set administratively)
Energy auctions
Other public financing options (public investment banks, loans, loan guarantees)
Emissions trading schemes Emissions trading scheme
Carbon taxes Taxes/tax relief (including carbon taxes, energy taxes and congestion taxes)
Government provision Government provision (focus on innovation procurement)
Removing fossil fuel subsidies Not covered
Border carbon adjustments Not covered
Offsets Not covered
Regulatory policy 
instrument typesPerformance standards (including with tradeable credits)Renewable obligations with tradeable green certificates
Efficiency obligations with tradeable white certificates
Clean energy or renewable portfolio standards (electricity)
Building codes (building efficiency codes)
Fuel efficiency standards
Appliance efficiency standards
Technology standards Not covered
Soft policy instrumentsDivestment and disclosure Not covered
Voluntary agreements (public voluntary programmes 
and negotiated agreements)Voluntary agreements
Energy labels
16.4.2 The Drivers and Politics of National Policies 
for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
Governments around the world implement innovation policies in the 
energy and climate space with the aim of simultaneously advancing 
environmental, industrial policy (or competitiveness), and security 
goals (Anadón 2012; Surana and Anadon 2015; Meckling et al. 
2017; Matsuo and Schmidt 2019; Peñasco et al. 2021) (medium 
evidence,  medium agreement). Co-benefits of policies shaping 
technological innovation in climate-related technologies, including 
competitiveness, health, and improved distributional impacts can 
be drivers of climate mitigation policy in the innovation sphere 
(Stokes and Warshaw 2017; Deng et al. 2018; Probst et al. 2020). 
For instance, this was the case for climate and air pollution policies 
with local content requirements for different types of renewable 
energy projects in places including China (Qiu and Anadon 2012; 
Lewis 2014), India (Behuria 2020), South Africa (Kuntze and 
Moerenhout 2012), and Canada (Genest 2014) (robust evidence, 
medium agreement).
The emergence of industries and support groups can lead 
to more sustained support for innovation policies (Meckling 
et al. 2015; Schmidt and Sewerin 2017 Stokes and Breetz 2018; 
Meckling 2019; Meckling and Nahm 2019; Schmid et al. 2020). 
Conversely, policies shaping technology innovation contribute to 
the creation and evolution of different stakeholder groups (robust 
evidence,  high agreement). Most of the literature on the role of 
the politics and interest groups has focused on renewable energy technologies, although there is some work on heating in buildings 
(Wesche et al. 2019).
As novel technologies become cost-competitive, opposition of 
incumbents usually grows, as well as the dangers of lock-in that can 
be posed by the new winner. Addressing this involves adapting policy 
(robust evidence, high agreement).
Three phases of politics in the development of policies to meet climate 
and industrial objectives can be identified, at the top, the middle 
and the bottom of the experience curve (Breetz et al. 2018) (see 
also Figure 16.1, and Geels 2002). In the first phase of ‘niche market 
diffusion’, the politics of more sustained support for a technology or 
set of technologies become possible after a group of economic winners 
and ‘clean energy constituencies’ are created (Meckling et al. 2015). 
When technologies grow out of the niche (second phase), they pose 
a  more serious competition to incumbents who may become more 
vocal opponents of additional support for innovation in the competing 
technologies (Geels 2014; Stokes 2016). In a  third phase, path-
dependence in policymaking and lock-in in institutions need to change 
to accommodate new infrastructure, the integration of technologies, 
the emergence of complementary technologies and of new regulatory 
regimes (Levin et al. 2012; Aklin and Urpelainen 2013).Demonstration
Prototype
Research
(Fundamental science and 
technology exploration)Early adoptionMarket adoption 
and scale-upMaturityPublic policy instruments supporting innovation
Second generation
(learning from early 
ideas)Second generation
(learning from early 
ideas)Dead endDead endFirst commercial-
scale exampleFirst commercial-
scale exampleNiche marketsNiche marketsEconomies of scaleEconomies of scaleContinuous incremental 
improvementsContinuous incremental 
improvements
Potential future 
disruptorPotential future 
disruptorKnowledge 
transferKnowledge 
transfer
First generationFirst generation
Third generation
(new ideas arising 
from experience)Third generation
(new ideas arising 
from experience)Market creation 
(e.g., feed-in tariffs, 
tax subsidies, loans, 
procurement, carbon 
pricing)
Technology 
demonstration
Technology 
development
ResearchRenewable 
standards
Building codes
Performance 
standards
Information 
provision; labelling; 
mandated purchasesRegulatory and 
soft instrumentsEconomic and 
ﬁnancial policy 
instruments
Time  Innovation stage
Figure 16.1 | Technology innovation process and the (illustrative) and role of different public policy instruments (on the right-hand side).  Source: adapted 
from IEA (2020a). Note that, as shown in Section 16.4.4, demand-pull instruments in the regulatory instrument category, for instance, can also shape the early stages of the 
innovation process. Their position on the latter stages is highlighted in this figure because typically these instruments have been introduced in latter stages of the development 
of the technology.
16.4.3 Indicators to Assess the Innovation, 
Competitiveness and Distributional 
Outcomes of Policy Instruments
If policy instruments are created to (at least partly) shape innovation 
for systemic transitions to a zero-carbon future, they also need to 
be evaluated on their impact on the whole socio-technical system 
(Neij and Åstrand 2006) and a  wide range of goals, including 
distributional impacts and competitiveness and jobs (Stern 2007; 
Peñasco et  al. 2021). Given this and the current policy focus on 
green recovery and green industrial policy, we assess impacts 
on competitiveness and equity, although we primarily focus on 
innovation outcomes. Table 16.9 lists the selected set of indicators 
used to assess the impact of the policy instrument types covered 
in the right-hand column in Table 16.8. The table does not include 
technology diffusion or deployment because these are covered in 
the technological effectiveness evaluation criterion in Chapter 13. 
As noted in section  16.2, it is very difficult to measure or fully 
understand innovation with one or even several indicators. In 
addition, all indicators have strengths and weaknesses, and may 
be more relevant in some countries and sectors than in others. The 
literature assessing the impact of different policy instruments on 
innovation often covers just one of the various indicators listed in 
the second column of Table 16.9.
16.4.4 Assessment of Innovation and Other Impacts 
of Innovation Policy Instruments
While it is very difficult to attribute a causal relationship between 
a  particular policy instrument implementation and different 
innovation indicators, given the complexity of the innovation system 
(Section 16.3), there is a large volume of quantitative and qualitative 
literature aiming to identify such an impact.
16.4.4.1 Assessment of the Impact on Innovation of Technology 
Push Policy Instruments: Public RD&D Investments, 
Other R&D Incentives and Public Procurement
Economic and direct investment policy instrument types are 
typically associated with a direct focus on technological innovation: 
research and development (R&D) grants, R&D tax credits, prizes, 
national laboratories, technology incubators (including support 
for business development, plans), novel direct funding instruments (e.g.,  Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E)), and 
innovation procurement.
Public research, development and demonstration (RD&D) 
investments have been found to have a positive impact on different 
innovation in energy- and climate-related technologies (robust 
evidence,  high agreement), but the assessment relies almost entirely 
on evidence from industrialised countries. Out of 17 publications 
focusing on this assessment, only three found no relationship 
between R&D funding and innovation metrics (Doblinger et al. 2019; 
Goldstein et al. 2020; Peñasco et al. 2021). Sixteen of them used ex 
post quantitative methods, and one relied on theoretical ex ante 
assessment; only two of them included some non-industrialised 
countries, with one being the theoretical analysis. The evidence 
available does not point to public R&D funding for climate-related 
technologies crowding out private R&D (an important driver of 
innovation) but instead crowding it in. Box  16.6 summarises the 
evidence available of the impact of ARPA-E (a public institution 
created in the USA in 2009 to allocate public R&D funding in energy) 
on innovation and competitiveness outcomes. Another institution 
supporting energy R&D that is the subject of much interest is the 
institutions of the Fraunhofer Society.
No evidence has been found regarding the specific impact of R&D 
tax credits on climate mitigation or adaptation technologies, but it 
is worth noting that, generally speaking, R&D tax credits are found 
to incentivise innovation in firms, with a greater impact on small and 
medium firms (OECD 2020). This is consistent with the fact that most 
of the evidence on the positive impact of public R&D support schemes 
covers small and medium firms (Howell 2017; Doblinger et al. 2019; 
Goldstein et al. 2020). Although there is a high level of agreement in 
the literature regarding the impact of R&D investments on innovation 
outcomes in climate-related technologies, it is important to note that 
this evidence comes from industrialised countries. This does not mean 
that public R&D investments in energy have been found to have 
no impact on developing countries innovation or competitiveness 
outcomes, but rather that we were not able to find such studies 
focussing on developing countries.
Overall, public procurement has high potential to incentivise 
innovation in climate technologies, but the evidence is mixed, 
particularly in developing countries (limited evidence,  medium 
agreement). Public procurement accounted for 13% of gross 
domestic product (GDP) in OECD in 2013 and much more in some 
Table 16.9 | Outcomes (first row) and indicators (second row) to evaluate the impact of policies shaping innovation to foster carbon neutral economies. 
Sources: innovation outcomes indicators are sourced from Del Rio and Cerdá (2014), Grubb et al. (2021) and Peñasco et al. (2021); the indicators under the competitiveness 
and distributional effects criteria are sourced from Peñasco et al. (2021).
Policy instrument 
OutcomesInnovation
(Part of Chapter 13 ‘Transformative 
potential’ evaluation criterion)Competitiveness
(Part of Chapter 13 ‘Economic 
effectiveness’ evaluation criterion)Distributional impacts
(Defined in the same way as in Chapter13)
Examples of indicators 
used for each outcome 
in the literatureR&D investments, cost improvements, 
learning rates, patents, publications, 
reductions in abatement costs, energy 
efficiency improvements, other performance 
characteristics, firms reporting carbon 
saving innovationIndustry creation, net job creation, export 
of renewable energy technology equipment, 
economic growth (GNP , GDP), productivity, 
other investmentsLevel and incidence of support costs, change in 
spending on electricity as a percentage of total 
household spending, participation of different 
stakeholders, international equity (e.g., tCO 2-eq 
per capita), unequal access between large vs. 
small producers or firms
emerging and developing economies (Baron 2016). Its main goal 
is to acquire products or services to improve public services, 
infrastructures and facilities and, in some cases, to also incentivise 
innovation. It is important to implement several steps in the public 
procurement procedure to improve transparency, minimise waste, 
fraud and corruption of public fund. These steps range from the 
assessment of a  need, issuance of a  tender, to the monitoring 
of delivery of the good or service. Box  16.5 outlines a  public 
procurement programme that was implemented in The Netherlands 
in 2005 with a focus on green technologies. In spite of the fact that 
green procurement policies have been implemented, the literature 
assessing the innovation impact of public procurement programmes 
is relatively limited, and suggests either a  positive impact or no 
impact (Alvarez and Rubio 2015; Baron 2016; Fernández-Sastre 
and Montalvo-Quizhpi 2019; Peñasco et al. 2021). The majority of 
cases where the impact is positive are analyses of industrialised 
countries, while no impact emerges in the case of a  developing 
country (Ecuador). More empirical research in both developing and 
developed countries is needed to understand the impact of public 
procurement, which has the potential to support the achievement 
of other societal challenges (Edler and Georghiou 2007; Henderson 
and Newell 2011; Baron 2016; ICLEI 2018).16.4.4.2 Assessment of the Impact on Competitiveness 
of Technology Push Policy Instruments: Public 
RD&D Investments, Other R&D Incentives and 
Public Procurement
Public R&D investments in the energy, renewables, and environment 
space are generally associated with positive impacts on industrial 
development or ‘competitiveness outcome’ (robust evidence,  medium 
agreement). In a  number of cases, negligible or negative impacts 
emerge (Doblinger et al. 2019; Goldstein et al. 2020; Peñasco et al. 2021).  
The majority of the 15 analyses rely on ex post quantitative methods, 
while only four use ex ante modelling approaches. Also, in this case, 
the vast majority of the evidence is from industrialised countries.
There is limited and mixed evidence regarding the (positive or 
negative) impact of public procurement for low-carbon or climate 
technologies in developed countries (limited evidence,  low 
agreement), and none from developing countries. All of the four 
evaluations identified in the Peñasco et al. (2021) review relied 
on qualitative methods. One found  a  positive impact, another 
a negative impact and two others found no impact. All of the studies 
covered European country experiences.Box 16.5 | Green Public Procurement in The Netherlands
In 2005, the Dutch national government acknowledged a move in the House of Representatives to utilise their annual spending power 
to promote the market for sustainable goods and services, as well as to act as a role model. Hence, a policy for environmentally-friendly 
procurement was developed and implemented across the national, local and provincial governments. Subsequently, sustainable public 
procurement has expanded into a multidimensional policy in The Netherlands, accommodating policies on green public procurement, 
bio-based public procurement, international social criteria, social return on investment, innovation-oriented public procurement and 
circular economy.
The Green Public Procurement (GPP) policy is targeted at minimising the negative impacts of production and consumption on the nature 
environment (Melissen and Reinders 2012; Cerutti et al. 2016). It includes a wide range of environmental criteria for different product 
groups that public organisations frequently procure, such as office equipment, uniforms, road works and catering. There are 45 product 
groups (Melissen and Reinders, 2012) and six product clusters as part of the government’s purchasing in terms of sustainability 
(PIANOo Expertisecentrum 2020). The six product clusters are: i) automation and telecommunications; ii) energy; iii) ground, road and 
hydraulic engineering; iv) office facilities and services; v) office buildings; and vi) transport (PIANOo Expertisecentrum 2020).The GPP 

documents and are not shared online. Others are available for download. The tender implementation plan for The Netherlands is 
available on https://gpp2020.eu/low-carbon-tenders/open-tenders/. One of the important scenarios is that the public procurers need 
the details of Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) carried out in a tool called DuboCalc, which calculates the environmental impacts of the 
materials and methods of an infrastructural projects. GPP 2020 has reported that three million tonnes of CO 2 would be saved in 
The Netherlands alone if all Dutch public authorities applied the national Sustainable Public Procurement Criteria.
Research has been carried out to determine the prime mover for implementing Green Public Procurement. An online survey was 
administered among public procurement officers who subscribed to the newsletters of two Dutch associations that provide advice and 
training to public procurers. This yielded a sample size of more than 200 (Grandia and Voncken 2019). The first association is called 
Nevi which is the only organisation in The Netherlands that offers certified procurement training programmes. The second association 
is called PIANOo which is a public procurement expertise centre paid by the Dutch national government to bring together relevant 
information regarding public procurement and provide public procurers with useful tools through their websites, workshops, meetings 
and annual conferences. The data from the survey was then analysed using structural equations modelling (SEM) and the results 
show that ability, motivation and opportunities affect the implementation of GPP . Particularly, opportunity was found to affect GPP , 
innovation-oriented public procurement and the circular economy, but not the other types of public procurement.
R&D and procurement policies have a positive impact on distributional 
outcomes (limited evidence, high agreement). Peñasco et al. (2021) 
identify three evaluations of the impact of RD&D funding on 
distributional outcomes (two using quantitative methods and one ex 
ante theoretical methods) and one of procurement on distributional 
outcomes (relying on qualitative analysis).
16.4.4.3 Emerging Insights on Different Public R&D 
and Demonstration Funding Schemes
The ability of a given R&D policy instrument to impact innovation and 
competitiveness depends to some extent on policy design features 
(limited evidence, high agreement). As discussed in Section 16.4.4.4, 
this is not unique to R&D funding. Most of these assessments use 
a  limited number of indicators (e.g.,  patents and publications and 
follow-on private financing, firm growth and survival, respectively), 
and are focused on the energy sector, and on the USA and other 
industrialised countries. Extrapolating to emerging economies and 
low-income countries is difficult. There is no evidence on the impact 
of different ways of allocating public energy R&D investments in the 
context of developing countries.Block funding, which tends to be more flexible, can lead to research 
that is more productive or novel, but there are other factors that can 
affect the extent to which block funding can lead to more or less 
novel outcomes (limited evidence, medium agreement). Research 
on national research laboratories, which conduct at least 30%  of 
all research in 68 countries around the world (Anadon et al. 2016a), 
are a widespread mechanism to carry out public R&D and allocate 
funds, but assessments of their performance is limited to developed 
countries. R&D priorities are also guided by institutions, and 
research focused on general technology innovation policy finds that 
institutions often do not embody the goals of the poor or marginalised 
(Anadon et al. 2016b).
In the case of the US Department of Energy, block funding that can be 
quickly allocated to novel projects (such as that allocated to National 
Labs as part of the Laboratory Directed Research and Development 
funding) has been found to be associated with improved innovation 
indicators (Anadon et al. 2016a). Research in Japan on R&D funding 
in general (not for climate-related technologies) however, indicates 
that R&D funds allocated competitively result in higher novelty for 
‘high status’ (the term used in the paper to refer to senior male 
researchers), while block funding was associated with research 
of higher novelty for ‘lower status’ researchers (e.g., junior female 
researchers) (Wang et al. 2018).
Box 16.6 | ARPA-E – A Novel R&D Funding Allocation Mechanism Focused on an Energy Mission
One approach for allocating public R&D funds in energy involves relying on active programme managers and having clear technology 
development missions that focus on high-risk high-reward areas and projects. This approach can be exemplified by a relatively new 
energy R&D funding agency in the USA, the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Energy (ARPA-E). This agency was created in 

funding high-risk, high-reward research in defence-related areas (Bonvillian and Van Atta 2011; US National Academies of Sciences 
Engineering and Medicine 2017; Bonvillian 2018). DARPA programme managers had a lot of discretion for making decisions about 
funding projects, but since energy R&D funding is usually more politically vulnerable than defence R&D funding, the ARPA-E model 
involved programme managers requesting external review as an informational input (Azoulay et al. 2019).
As for DARPA, ARPA-E programme managers use an active management approach that involves empowering programme manages to 
make decisions about funding allocation, milestones and goals. ARPA-E managers also differ from other R&D allocation mechanisms 
in that ARPA-E staff retain some control on the funded projects after the allocation of funds. As argued by Azoulay et al. (2019), 
even though this relative control over the project can result in a reduction in the flexibility of funded researchers, some ‘exploration’ 
happens at the programme manager level.
Research on ARPA-E also sheds light on the process of project selection, or how programme managers decide what projects to fund. 
Programme managers do not just follow the rankings of peer reviewers (sometimes projects with very disparate rankings were funded) 
and in many cases programme managers reported using information from review comments instead of the rankings (Goldstein and 
Kearney 2020). Azoulay et al. (2019) suggest that, if expert disagreement is a useful proxy for uncertainty in research, then the use of 
individual discretion in ARPA-E would result in a portfolio of projects with a higher level of uncertainty, as defined by disagreement 
among reviewers. Moreover, under the premise that uncertainty is a corollary to novelty, individual discretion is an antidote to novelty 
bias in peer review.
While innovation is notoriously hard to track and, particularly for emerging technologies, it can take a lot time to assess, early analysis 
has shown that this mission-orientation and more ‘actively managed’ R&D funding programme may yield greater innovation patenting 
outcomes than other US energy R&D funding programmes, and a greater or similar rate of academic publications when compared to 
other public funding agencies in energy in the USA, ranging from the Office of Science, the more applied Office of Energy Efficiency 
and Renewable Energy, or the small grants office (US National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine 2017; Goldstein and 
Public financing for R&D and research collaboration in the energy 
sector is important for small firms, at least in industrialised countries, 
and it does not seem to crowd out private investment in R&D (medium 
evidence, high agreement). Small US and UK firms accrue more 
patents and financing when provided with cash incentives for R&D 
in the form of grants (Howell 2017; Pless 2019). US cleantech start-
ups which partner with government partners for joint technology 
development or licensing partnerships accrue more patents and 
follow-on financing (Doblinger et al. 2019).
Overall, the body of literature on public R&D funding design in 
energy- and climate-related technologies provides some high-level 
guidance on how to make the most of these direct RD&D investments 
in energy technologies in the climate change mitigation space, 
including: giving researchers and technical experts autonomy and 
influence over funding decisions; incorporating technology transfer in 
research organisations; focusing demonstration projects on learning; 
incentivising international collaboration in energy research; adopting 
an adaptive learning strategy; and making funding stable and 
predictable (Narayanamurti et al. 2009; Narayanamurti and Odumosu 
2016; Chan et al. 2017) (medium evidence, high agreement).
Without carefully designed public funding for demonstration efforts, 
often in a  cost-shared manner with industry, the experimentation 
at larger scales needed for more novel technologies needed for 
climate change mitigation may not take place. (medium evidence, 
high agreement). Government funding, specifically for technology 
demonstration projects, for RD&D in energy technologies, plays 
a crucial supporting role (Section 16.2.1). Governments can facilitate 
knowledge spillovers between firms, between countries, and 
between technologies (Cohen et al. 2002; Baudry and Bonnet 2019) 
(Section 16.2).
16.4.4.4 Assessment of the Impact on Innovation and 
on Competitiveness and Distributional Outcomes 
of Market Pull Policy Instruments
Demand-pull policies such as tradeable green certificates, taxes, 
or auctions, are essential to support scaling-up efforts (Remer and 
Mattos 2003; Wilson 2012; Nahm and Steinfeld 2014). Just as for 
R&D investments, research has indicated that effective demand 
pull needs to be credible, durable, and aligned with other policies 
(Nemet et al. 2017) and that the effectiveness of different demand-
pull instruments depends on policy design (del Río and Kiefer 2021). Historical analyses of the relative importance of demand pull and 
technology push are clear: both are needed to provide robust 
incentives for investment in innovation. Interactions between them 
are central as their combination enables innovators to connect 
a technical opportunity with a market opportunity (Freeman 1995; 
Jacobsson et al. 2004; Grubler and Wilson 2013). It is important to 
note that these market pull policies are often put in place primarily 
to  meet security and/or environmental goals, although innovation 
and competitiveness are sometimes also pursued explicitly.
Emissions trading schemes
Overall evidence suggests that the emissions trading schemes, as 
currently designed, have not significantly contributed to innovation 
outcomes (medium evidence, medium/high agreement).
Penasco et al. (2021) review 20 evaluations: eight identified a positive 
impact (although in at least two cases, the paper indicated that the 
impact was small or negligible); 11 no impact; and one was associated 
with a negative impact on innovation indicators. The studies that found 
no impact and the studies that found some impact covered all three 
methods (quantitative ex post, qualitative and theoretical and ex ante 
analysis). Another review focused only on empirical studies (mainly 
quantitative but also qualitative), covered a slightly longer period and 
identified 19 studies (15 using quantitative methods) (Lilliestam et al. 
2021). With a narrower set of indicators of innovation, they concluded 
that there was very little empirical evidence linking innovation with 
the emissions trading schemes studied to date (Lilliestam et al. 2021). 
This review focused mainly on papers evaluating the earlier stages 
of the European Emissions Trading Scheme, which featured relatively 
low carbon dioxide prices, and covered a small set of firms, showing 
that carbon pricing policy design is an important determinant of 
innovation outcomes. Combining both reviews, there are a  total 
of 27  individual studies, some of them providing mixed evidence 
of impact, and 23 of them suggest there was no impact or that (in 
a  couple of cases) it was small. It is important to note that some 
researchers note that, for particular subsectors and actors, emissions 
trading schemes have had an impact on patenting trends (Calel and 
Dechezleprêtre 2016). Overall the expectation is that higher prices 
and coverage would result in higher impacts and that, over time, the 
impact on innovation would grow.Narayanamurti 2018). In addition, research analysing the first cohort of cleantech start-ups has found that start-ups supported by 
ARPA-E had more innovative outcomes when compared to those that had applied but not received funding, with others that had not 
received any government support, and with others that had received other types of government R&D support (Goldstein et al. 2020). 
Overall, the mission-oriented ARPA-E approach has been successful in the USA when it comes to innovation outcomes. The extent to 
which it can yield the same outcomes in other geographies with different innovation and financing environments remains unknown. 
(limited evidence, high agreement).Box 16.6 (continued)
Carbon and environmental taxes
The impact of carbon taxes on innovation outcomes is more positive 
than that for emissions trading schemes, but the evidence is more 
limited (limited evidence, medium agreement). Assessments of their 
impact on innovation metrics have been very limited, with only four 
studies (three quantitative and one ex ante). Three of the studies 
found a positive impact of carbon taxes on innovation outcomes, and 
one found no impact (Peñasco et al. 2021).
Depending on the design (including the value and coverage of the 
tax), carbon taxes can either have positive, negative or null impact 
on competitiveness and distributional outcomes (medium evidence, 
medium agreement). The evidence on the impact of carbon taxes on 
competitiveness is significant (a total of 27 evaluations) and mixed, 
with six of them reporting some positive impacts, 10  reporting 
no impact, and 11 reporting negative impacts (so 59% were 
not associated with negative impacts). Most of the evaluations 
reporting negative impacts were theoretical assessments, and only 
three ex post quantitative analysis (Peñasco et al. 2021). Twenty-
four evaluations covered distributional impacts of carbon taxes and 
other environmental taxes, the majority (15) found the existence of 
some negative distributional impacts, six found positive impacts, 
and three  found no distributional impacts. Differences in the 
assessment results stem from the design of the taxes (Peñasco et al. 
2021). It is important to note that, once again, the evidence comes 
from industrialised countries and emerging economies.
Feed-in-tariffs
Many factors affect the impacts of feed-in tariffs (FITs) on outcomes 
other than innovation (robust evidence,  high agreement). While 
FITs have been generally associated with positive innovation 
outcomes, some of the differences found in the literature may arise 
from differences in the evaluation method (Peñasco et al. 2021) or 
differences in policy design (e.g., the level and the rate of decrease 
of the tariff) (Hoppmann et al. 2014), the policy mixes (Rogge et al. 
2017), the technologies targeted and their stage of development 
(Huenteler et al. 2016b), and the geographical and temporal context 
of where the policy was put in place (Section 16.3). Research has 
also found that, particularly for less mature technologies, a higher 
technology specificity in the design of FITs is associated with more 
innovation (Del Río 2012). FITs yield better results if they account 
for the specificities of the country; or else, the technology and the 
policy could result in negative distributional and (to a lesser extent) 
competitiveness impacts. Meckling et al. (2017) indicate that an 
‘enduring challenge’ of technology-specific industrial policy such as 
some FITs is to avoid locking in suboptimal clean technologies – 
a challenge which, among other options, could be overcome with 
targeted niche procurement for next-generation technologies. 
Other authors have cautioned that the move from renewable FITs 
to auctions may favour existing PVs (e.g.,  polysilicon) over more 
novel solar power technologies (Sivaram 2018b) such as thin-film 
PV, amorphous PV, and perovskites.
Policy design, policy mixes, and domestic capacity and infrastructure 
are important factors determining the extent to which economic policy instruments in industrialised countries and emerging economies 
can also lead to positive (or at least not negative) competitiveness 
outcomes and distributional outcomes (medium evidence, medium 
agreement) (Section 16.3). Prioritising low-cost energy generation in 
the design of FIT schemes can result in a lower focus of innovation 
efforts on more novel technologies and greater barriers to incumbents 
in less mature technologies (Hoppmann et al. 2013). Similarly, case 
study research from Mexico and South Africa indicates that focusing 
on low-cost renewable energy generation can only result in a greater 
reliance on existing foreign value chains and capital, and thus in lower 
or negative impacts on domestic competitiveness. In other words, 
some approaches can hinder the development of the local capabilities 
that could result in greater long-term benefits domestically (Matsuo 
and Schmidt 2019). Evidence for developing countries indicates that 
local and absorptive capacity also play an important role, in particular, 
on the ability of policies to contribute to competitiveness or industrial 
policy goals (Binz and Anadon 2018). Research comparing China’s 
and India’s policies and outcomes on wind energy also suggest 
that policy durability and systemic approaches can affect industrial 
outcomes (Surana and Anadon 2015).
Energy auctions
The evidence of the impact of renewable energy auctions on 
innovation outcomes is very small and provides mixed results 
(limited evidence,  low agreement). Out of six evaluations, three 
identify positive impacts, two no impacts, and one negative impacts. 
All of the evaluations but one were qualitative or theoretical, 
and the quantitative assessment indicated no impact (Peñasco 
et al. 2021). There is more evidence covering emerging economies 
analysing the impacts of auctions when compared to other policy 
instrument types. For example, there is work comparing the 
approaches to renewable energy auctions in South Africa and 
Denmark (Toke 2015) finding a positive impact on the latter stages 
of innovation (mainly deployment), and broader work on auctions 
covering OECD countries as well as Brazil, South Africa and China 
not finding a significant impact on innovation (Wigand et al. 2016). 
Work comparing renewable energy auctions in different countries 
in South America generally finds a  positive impact on innovation 
outcomes (Mastropietro et al. 2014). The body of evidence 
on the impact of auctions on competitiveness is also limited 
(six  evaluations) and indicates negative outcomes of renewable 
auctions of competitiveness (limited evidence,  low agreement). As 
with other policies, the design of the auctions can affect innovation 
outcomes (del Río and Kiefer 2021). Only two studies investigated 
distributional outcomes, and both were negative.
Other financial instruments
There is no explicit literature on the ability of green public banks, and 
targeted loans, and loan guarantees to lead to upstream innovation 
investments and activities, although there is evidence on their role 
in deployment (Geddes et al. 2018). This notwithstanding, the key 
role of these institutions is in the innovation system (OECD 2015b; 
Geddes et al. 2018) (Sections 16.2.1 and 16.3) and the belief that 
they can de-risk scale-up and the testing of business models (Geddes 
et al. 2018; Probst et al. 2021) (Chapter 17).
Renewable obligations with tradeable green certificates
There is mixed evidence of the impact of tradeable green certificates 
(TGCs) on innovation (limited evidence, low agreement) and 
competitiveness (limited evidence, low agreement). Out of the 

two  a  positive impact, and three a  negative impact. All of them 
used a qualitative research approach. Of the six studies focusing on 
competitiveness outcomes, three conclude that TGCs have had no 
impact on competitiveness, while two indicate a negative impact and 
one a  positive impact. Only one of the studies was quantitative, 
and did not identify an impact on competitiveness.
TGCs are associated with the existence of negative distributional 
impacts in most applications (medium evidence, high agreement). 
Ten out of 12 studies identify the existence of some negative impacts. 
All but one of these studies (which focused on India) are based on 
analysis of policies implemented in industrialised countries.
Clean energy and renewable portfolio standards
The impact of renewable portfolio standards without tradeable 
credits on innovation outcomes is negligible or very small (medium 
evidence,  medium agreement). Out of the nine studies, seven 
reported no impact on innovation outcomes and two a  positive 
impact (Peñasco et al. 2021). Most of these papers focused on 
patenting and private R&D innovation indicators and not cost 
reductions. Impact on competitiveness is found to be negligible 
or positive (limited evidence,  medium agreement). Out of eight 
evaluations, five  report a  positive impact and three a  negligible 
impact; only two  are quantitative studies (Peñasco et al. 2021). 
Negative distributional impacts from renewable portfolio standards 
can emerge in some cases (limited evidence,  low agreement). Out 
of eight evaluations, four identified positive impacts, and four 
negative impacts; all of the studies identifying a  positive impact 
were theoretical. There are efforts focused on clean energy portfolio 
standards which include technologies beyond renewables.
Efficiency obligations with tradeable credits
The impact of tradeable white certificates in innovation is largely 
positive, but the evidence is limited (limited evidence, medium/
high agreement). Out of four evaluations, only one of which was 
quantitative, three report a  positive impact and one reports no 
impact (Peñasco et al. 2021). The impact of white certificates on 
competitiveness is positive (limited evidence, high agreement) 
while the impact on distributional outcomes is very mixed (limited 
evidence, low agreement). Two theoretical studies report positive 
competitiveness impacts. Out of 11 evaluations of distributional 
outcomes, eight rely on theoretical ex ante approaches. Of 
the 11 evaluations: seven reported positive impacts (four of 
them  using theoretical methods); three indicated negative impacts 
(using theoretical methods); and one reported no impact.Building codes
There is evidence of the impact of building codes on innovation 
outcomes (Peñasco et al. 2021). Only two studies assessed 
competitiveness impacts (one identified positive impacts and 
one negligible ones) and three studies identified distributional 
impacts, all positive.
Overall, the evidence on the impact of the market pull policy 
instruments covered in Section  16.4.4.4 when it comes to the 
competitiveness outcome (at least in the short term) is more mixed. 
For some of them, the evidence of a positive impact on innovation 
is more consistent than the others (for carbon taxes or FITs, for 
example). Peñasco et al. (2021) found that the disagreements in the 
evidence regarding the positive, negative or no impact of a policy on 
competitiveness or distributional outcomes can often be explained by 
differences in policy design, differences in geographical or temporal 
context (since the review included evidence from countries from all 
over the world), or on how policy mixes may have affected the ability 
of the research design of the underlying papers to separate the 
impact of the policy under consideration from the others.
16.4.4.5 Assessment of the Impact on Innovation, 
Competitiveness and Distributional Outcomes 
of Regulatory Policy Instruments Targeting 
Efficiency Improvements
There is medium evidence that the introduction of flexible, 
performance-based environmental regulation on energy efficiency in 
general (e.g., efficiency standards) can stimulate innovative responses 
in firms (Ambec et al. 2013; Popp 2019) (medium evidence, high 
agreement). Evidence comes from both observational studies that 
examine patenting, R&D or technological responses to regulatory 
interventions, and from surveys and qualitative case studies in 
which firms report regulatory compliance as a driving force for the 
introduction of environmentally-beneficial innovations (Grubb et al. 
2021). While the literature examining the impact of environmental 
regulation on innovation is large, there have been fewer studies on 
the innovation effects of minimum energy or emissions performance 
regulations specifically relating to climate mitigation. We discuss in 
turn two types of efficiency regulations: on vehicles, and on appliances.
Relationship between automotive efficiency 
regulations and innovation
The announcement, introduction and tightening of vehicle fleet 
efficiency or greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards either at 
the national or sub-national level positively impacts innovation as 
measured by patents (Barbieri 2015) or vehicle characteristics (Knittel 
2011; Kiso 2019) as summarised in a review by Grubb et al. (2021). 
Detailed studies on the innovation effects of national pollutant 
(rather than energy) regulations on automotive innovation also 
indicate that introducing or tightening performance standards has 
driven technological change (Lee et al. 2010). Some studies in the 
USA that examine periods in which little regulatory change took 
place have found that the effects of performance standards on fuel 
economy have been small (Knittel 2011) or not significant relative 
to the innovation effects of prices (Crabb and Johnson 2010). This 
is at least in part because ongoing efficiency improvements during 
this period were offset by increases in other product attributes. For 
example, a  study by Knittel (2011) observed that size and power 
increased without a  corresponding increase in fuel consumption. 
It has also been observed that regulatory design may introduce 
distortions that affect automotive innovation choices: in particular, 
fuel economy standards based on weight classes have been observed 
to distort light-weighting strategies for fuel efficiency in both China 
(Hao et al. 2016) and Japan (Ito and Sallee 2018).
A number of studies have focused on the impacts of a sub-national 
technology-forcing policy: the California Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) 
mandate. When it was introduced in 1990, this policy required 
automotive firms to ensure that 2% of the vehicles they sold in 1998 
would be zero-emission. In the years immediately after introduction 
of the policy, automotive firms reported that it was a  significant 
stimulus to their R&D activity in electric vehicles (Brown et al. 
1995). Quantitative evidence examining patents and prototypes has 
indicated that the stringency of the policy was a significant factor in 
stimulating innovation, though this was, in part, dependent on firm 
strategy (Sierzchula and Nemet 2015). As for the previous instruments, 
most of the evidence comes from industrialised countries, and 
additional research on other countries would be beneficial.
Relationship between appliance efficiency standards and innovation
Regulation-driven deployment of existing technologies can generate 
innovation in those technologies through learning by- doing, induced 
R&D and other mechanisms, although not in all cases (medium 
evidence, medium agreement) (Grubb et al. 2021). The introduction or 
tightening of minimum energy performance standards for appliances 
(and for buildings, in Noailly (2012)) have driven innovation 
responses, using direct measures of product attributes (Newell et al. 
1999) and patents (Noailly 2012; Kim and Brown 2019), though not 
all studies have found a significant relationship (Girod et al. 2017). 
There is also evidence of a  correlation between regulation-driven 
deployment of energy-efficient products with accelerated learning in 
those technologies (Van Buskirk et al. 2014; Wei et al. 2017).
In addition to observational studies, evidence on the relationship 
between innovation and regulation comes from surveys in which 
respondents are asked whether they have engaged in innovation 
leading to energy saving or reduced GHG emissions, and what the 
motivations were for such innovation. Survey evidence has found 
that expected or current regulation can drive both R&D investment 
and decisions to adopt or introduce innovations that reduce energy 
consumption or CO 2 emissions (Horbach et  al. 2012; Grubb et  al. 
2021). Survey-based studies, however, tend not to specify the type 
of regulation.
Competitiveness and distributional impacts associated with vehicles 
and appliance performance standards
Minimum energy performance standards and appliance standards 
have been known to result in negative distributional impacts 
(limited evidence, medium/high agreement). Several studies focused on the USA have highlighted that minimum energy performance 
standards for vehicles tend to be regressive, with poorer households 
disproportionately affected (Jacobsen 2013; Levinson 2019), 
particularly when second-hand vehicles are taken into account (Davis 
and Knittel 2019). Similar arguments, though with less evidence, have 
been made for appliance standards (Sutherland 2006).
Overall, the extent to which regulations in energy efficiency 
result in positive or negative competitiveness impacts in firms is 
mixed (limited evidence, high disagreement). A  meta-analysis of 

consumption or GHG emissions, found that around half showed that 
regulations resulted in competitiveness impacts, while half did not 
(Cohen and Tubb 2018). Cohen and Tubb (2018) also found that 
studies examining performance-based regulations were less likely 
to find positive competitiveness impacts than those that examined 
market-based instruments.
Insights into causal mechanisms and co-evolutionary dynamics 
from case studies on efficiency regulations
While most of the literature addresses the extent to which regulation 
can induce innovation, a  number of case studies highlight that 
innovation can also influence regulation, as the costs of imposing 
regulation are reduced and political interests emerge that seek to 
exploit competitive advantages conferred by successfully developing 
energy-efficient or low-carbon technologies (medium evidence, 
high agreement). Case studies map the causal mechanisms relating 
regulations and innovation responses in specific firms or industries 
(Gann et al. 1998; Kemp 2005; Ruby 2015; Wesseling et al. 2015).
16.4.4.6 Assessment of the Impact on Innovation and 
on Competitiveness and Distributional Outcomes 
of Soft Instruments
Energy labels and innovation
The literature specifically focusing on the impacts of labels is very 
limited and indicates positive outcomes (limited evidence, high 
agreement). Energy labels may accompany a  minimum energy 
performance standard, and the outcomes of these policies are often 
combined in literature (IEA 2015). But again, given the limited 
evidence, more research is needed. Although there are many studies 
on energy efficiency more broadly and for both standards and labels, 
only eight studies specifically focus on labels. Furthermore, seven of 
them report positive outcomes and one negative outcomes. Six of the 
studies used qualitative methods mentioning the impacts of labelling 
on the development of new products (Wiel et al. 2006). Research 
specifically comparing voluntary labels with other mechanisms found 
a significant and positive relationship between labels and the number 
of energy-efficient inventions (Girod et al. 2017). More research is 
needed, especially in developing countries, that have extensive 
labelling programmes in place, and also with quantitative methods, to 
develop evidence on the impacts of labelling on innovation. Box 16.7 
discusses an example of a combination of policy instruments in China 
including labelling, sale bans and financial support.
Voluntary approaches and innovation
Voluntary approaches have a largely positive impact on innovation 
for those that choose to participate (robust evidence, medium 
agreement). Research on voluntary approaches focuses on firms 
adopting voluntary environmental management systems that can 
be certified based on standards of the widely adopted International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO 14001  – standard for 
environmental management) or the European Union’s Eco-
Management and Auditing Scheme (EMAS), which is partly mandatory. 
Out of 16 analyses: 70% report positive innovation outcomes in terms 
of patents, products or processes; 17% report negligible impacts; and 
13% report negative impacts. Positive innovation outcomes have 
been linked to firms’ internal resource management practices and 
were found to be strengthened in firms with mature environmental 
management systems and in the presence of other environmental 
regulations (Inoue et al. 2013; He and Shen 2019; Li et al. 2019a). 
Overall, studies are concentrated in a  few countries that do not 
fully capture where environmental management systems have been 
actually adopted (Boiral et al. 2018). There is a need for research in 
analyses of such instruments in emerging economies, including China 
and India, and methodologically in qualitative and longitudinal 
analyses (Boiral et al. 2018).Competitiveness and distributional outcomes of soft instruments
The outcomes for performance or endorsement labels have been 
associated with positive competitiveness outcomes (medium evidence, 
medium agreement) . Out of 19 studies, 89% report positive impact and 
11% negligible impact. Although there are several studies analysing 
competitiveness-related metrics, evidence on most individual metrics 
is sporadic, except for housing premiums. A large number of studies 
quantitatively assessing competitiveness find that green labels in 
buildings are associated with housing price premiums in multiple 
countries and regions (Fuerst and McAllister 2011; Kahn and Kok 2014; 
Zhang et al. 2017). Of those studies, 32% were qualitative, associating 
appliance labelling programmes with employment and industry 
development (European Commission 2018). There is a research gap in 
analyses of developing countries, and also in quantitatively assessing 
outcomes beyond housing price premiums.
A few studies on the distributional outcomes of voluntary labelling 
programmes point to positive impacts (limited evidence, high 
agreement). All four studies that focus on benefits for consumers 
and tenants report positive impacts (Devine and Kok 2015). Although 
there are benefits for utility companies and other stakeholders, more 
research is needed to specifically attribute these benefits to voluntary 
labels rather than energy efficiency programmes in general.Box 16.7 | China Energy Labelling Policies, Combined with Sale Bans and Financial Subsidies
From 1970 to 2001, China was able to significantly limit energy demand growth through energy-efficiency programmes. Energy use 
per unit of gross domestic product (GDP) declined by approximately 5% yr–1 during this period. However, between 2002 and 2005, 
energy demand per unit of GDP increased on average by 3.8% yr–1. To curb this energy growth, in 2005, the Chinese government 
announced a mandatory goal of 20% reduction of energy intensity between 2006 and 2010 (Zhou et al. 2010; Lo 2014).
An energy labelling system was passed in 2004. It requires manufacturers to provide information about the efficiency of their electrical 
appliances to consumers. From 2004 to 2010, 23 electrical appliances (including refrigerators, air conditioners and flat-screen TVs) 
being labelled as energy efficient with five different grades – grade 1 being the most energy efficient and grade 5 the least efficient. 
Any appliances with an efficiency grade higher than 5 cannot be sold in the market.
In addition to providing information to consumers, the National Development and Reform Commission, (which was in charge of 
designing the policies), and the Ministry of Finance launched in 2009 the ‘energy-saving products and civilian-benefiting project’ 
(Zhan et al. 2011). It covered air conditioners, refrigerators, flat panel televisions, washing machines, electrical efficient lighting, energy 
saving and new energy vehicles with the energy grades at 1 or 2. The project also included financial subsidies for the enterprises 
producing these products. The standard design of these financial subsidies involved the government paying for the price difference 
of energy-efficient products and general products. The manufacturers that produce the energy-efficient products receive financial 
subsidies directly from the government (Z. Wang et al. 2017).
Before 2008, the market share of grade 1 and grade 2 air conditioners was about 5%, and about 70% of all air conditioners were grade 

with that of the general air conditioners. Hence, the sales of energy-efficient air conditioners increased substantially, making the 
market share of grade 1 and 2 air conditioners about 80% in 2010 (Z. Wang et al. 2017). According to the information from China’s 
National Institute of Standardization, the energy label system saved more than 1.5 hundred billion kWh power between 2005 and 
March 2010, equivalent to more than 60 million tonnes of standard coal, 1.4 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions, and 60 tonnes 
of sulphur dioxide emissions (Zhan et al. 2011), which significantly contributed to energy saving goals of China’s 11th Five-Year Plan.
Voluntary agreements are associated with positive competitiveness 
outcomes (medium evidence, medium agreement): 14 out of 19 
evaluations identified were associated with positive outcomes, 
while three were associated with negligible outcomes, and 
two with negative outcomes. Research found an increase in 
perceived firm financial performance (de Jong et al. 2014; Moon 
et al. 2014). Studies also show an association with higher exports 
as more environmentally-conscious trade partners increasingly value 
environmental certifications (Bellesi et al. 2005). More research is 
needed to develop evidence on metrics of competitiveness besides 
firms’ financial performance, and especially in developing countries.
Voluntary agreements are associated with a  positive impact on 
distributional outcomes (limited evidence,  high agreement). Five 
studies, mainly using qualitative approaches, report a  positive 
association between a firm adopting an environmental management 
system and impacts on its supply chains. There is a need for more 
studies with quantitative assessments and geographical diversity.16.4.4.7 Summary of the Size and Direction of the Evidence of 
All Policy Instrument Types on Innovation Outcomes
Positive impacts have been identified more frequently in some 
policies than in others. There is also a lot of variation in the density 
of the literature. Developing countries are severely underrepresented 
in the decarbonisation policy instrument evaluation literature 
aiming to understand the impact on innovation. (high evidence, 
high agreement).
Figure 16.2 below indicates the extent to which some decarbonisation 
policy instruments have been more or less investigated in terms of 
their impact on innovation outcomes (as described in Table 16.9). For 
example, it indicates the extent to which there has been a greater 
focus of evaluations of the impact of R&D investments, emissions 
trading schemes and voluntary approaches on innovation. It also 
shows a  limited amount of evidence on procurement, efficiency 
obligations with tradeable green certificates (TGCs), building 
codes and auctions.Number of evaluationsPositive Negative Negligible
Energy labelsBuilding codes
Appliance
efﬁciency standardsFuel efﬁciency standardsRenewable
portfolio standardsEfﬁciency obligations
 with TWCsRenewable obligations
with TGCsAuctionsFeed-in tariffsCarbon taxesEmissions trading schemesProcurementR&D investments
Voluntary approaches051015202530
Policy instrument type
Figure  16.2 |  Number of evaluations available for each policy instrument type covered regarding their impact on innovation and direction of the 
assessment.  The vertical axis displays the number of evaluations claiming to isolate the impact of each policy instrument type on innovation outcomes as listed in Table 16.9. 
The colour indicates whether each evaluation identified a positive impact on the innovation outcome (blue), the existence of a negative impact (in red), and no impact (in grey). 
It builds on Grubb et al. (2021), Lilliestam et al. (2021) and Peñasco et al. (2021), and additional studies identified as part of these reviews. TGC stands for tradeable green 
certificates. TWC stands for tradeable white certificates.
16.4.5 Trade Instruments and their Impact 
on Innovation
There has been long-standing interest on the impact of Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) on domestic capacity, innovation and environmental 
outcomes. While this section looks at the impact of trade instruments 
on innovation, it does not cover the much larger body of evidence on 
the relationship between FDI and economic development and growth.
Overall, research indicates that trade can facilitate the entrance 
of new technologies, but the impact on innovation is less clear 
(limited evidence, low agreement). A recent study indicates that, for 
countries with high environmental performance, FDI has a negligible 
impact on environmental performance, while countries with a lower 
environmental performance may benefit from FDI in terms of their 
environmental performance (Li et al. 2019b). One analysis on China 
links FDI with improved environmental performance and energy 
efficiency and also innovation outcomes in general (Gao and Zhang 
2013). Other work links FDI with increased productivity across firms 
(not just those engaged in climate-related technologies) through 
spillovers (Newman et al. 2015). In addition, Brandão and Ehrl 
(2019) indicate that productivity of the electric power industry is 
more influenced by the transfer of embodied technology from other 
industries than by investments of the power industry. Also, they 
find that countries with high R&D stocks are the main sources of 
international technology spillovers and the source countries may also 
benefit from the spillover.
Other emerging work investigates the role of local content 
requirements on innovation outcomes and suggests that it can lead to 
increased power costs (negative distributional impacts). The benefits 
to the domestic innovation system, measured by patents or exports, 
are unclear if the policies are not part of a holistic and longer-lasting 
policy framework (Probst et al. 2020).
16.4.6 Intellectual Property Rights, Legal Framework 
and the Impact on Innovation
Virtually all countries around the world have instituted systems for 
the protection of creations and inventions, known as intellectual 
property rights (IPR) systems (WIPO 2021). While several types 
of intellectual property exist  – patents, copyright, design rights, 
trademarks, and more – this section will focus on patents, as the most 
relevant property right for technological innovations (WIPO 2008), 
and hence the most relevant for policy instruments in this context.
Patent systems aim to promote innovation and economic growth, 
by stimulating both the creation of new knowledge and diffusion of 
that knowledge (high evidence, high agreement). National patent 
systems, as institutions, play a  central role in theories on national 
innovation systems (high evidence, strong agreement). Patent 
systems are usually instituted to promote innovation and economic 
growth (Machlup and Penrose 1950; Nelson and Mazzoleni 1996; 
Encaoua et al. 2006). Some countries explicitly refer to this purpose 
in their law or legislation – for instance, the US Constitution states 
the purpose of the US IP rights system to ‘promote the progress of science and useful arts’. Patent systems aim to reach their goals by 
trying to strike a balance between the creation of new knowledge and 
diffusion of that knowledge (Scotchmer and Green 1990; Devlin 2010; 
Anadon et al. 2016b). They promote the creation of new knowledge 
(e.g., technological inventions) by providing a temporary, exclusive 
right to the holder of the patent, thus providing incentives to develop 
such new knowledge and helping parties to justify investments in 
R&D.  They promote the diffusion of this new knowledge via the 
detailed disclosure of the invention in the patent publication, 
and by enabling a ‘market for knowledge’ via trading patents and 
issuing licences (Arora et al. 2004). Although IP protections provide 
incentives to invest in innovation, they can also restrict the use of 
new knowledge by raising prices or blocking follow-on innovation 
(Wallerstein et al. 1993; Stiglitz 2008). As institutions, national patent 
systems feature prominently in models and theories of national 
innovation systems (Edquist 1997; Klein Woolthuis et al. 2005).
The degree to which patent systems actually promote innovation 
is subject to debate. Patent protection has been found to have 
a positive impact on R&D activities in patent-intensive industries, but 
this effect was found to be conditional on access to finance (Maskus 
et al. 2019). Patents are believed to be especially important to 
facilitate innovation in selected areas such as pharmaceuticals, where 
investments in developments and clinical trials are high, imitation 
costs are low, and there is often a one-to-one relationship between 
a patent and a product, referred to as a ‘discrete’ product industry 
(Cohen et al. 2000). At the same time, an increasing body of theoretical 
and empirical literature suggests that the proliferation of patents 
also discourages innovation (medium evidence, low agreement). 
Theoretical contributions note that a appropriability regime that is too 
stringent may greatly limit the diffusion of advanced technological 
knowledge and eventually block the development of differentiated 
technological capabilities within an industry, in what is called an 
‘appropriability trap’ (Edquist 1997; Klein Woolthuis et al. 2005). 
There has been a long-standing debate on the impact of patents and 
other IP rights on innovation and economic development (Machlup 
1958; Hall and Helmers 2019). Jaffe and Lerner (2004) and Bessen 
and Meurer (2009) highlight how IP rights also hamper innovation 
in a variety of ways. Other contributions in the literature focus on 
more specific factors. For example, Shapiro (2001) discusses ‘patent 
thickets’, where overlapping sets of patent rights mean that those 
seeking to commercialise new technology need to obtain licences 
from multiple patentees. Heller and Eisenberg (1998) argue that 
a ‘tragedy of the anticommons’ is likely to emerge when too many 
parties obtain the right to exclude others from using fragmented 
and overlapping pieces of knowledge  – ultimately leading to no 
one having the privilege of using the results of biomedical research. 
Reitzig et al. (2007) describe the damaging effects of extreme 
business strategies employing patents, such as ‘patent trolling’.
In general, IP protection and enforcement may have different 
impacts on economic growth in different types of countries (limited 
evidence, high agreement). There has been a  significant degree of 
harmonisation and cooperation between national IP systems over 
time. The most recent milestone is the World Trade Organization 
(WTO) 1994 Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS) Agreement, entered into by all WTO members, which 
sets down minimum standards for the regulation by national 
governments of many forms of IP as applied to nationals of other 
WTO member nations (WTO 1994). Developing countries successfully 
managed to include some flexibilities into TRIPS, both in terms of 
timing of legislative reform, and the content of the reforms. In an 
attempt to understand the  effects of the introduction of TRIPS, 
Falvey et al. (2006) find that the effect of IP protection on growth 
is positively and significantly related to growth for low- and high-
income countries, but not for middle-income countries. They argue 
that low-income countries benefit from increased technology flows, 
but middle-income countries may have offsetting losses from the 
reduced scope for imitation. Note that Falvey et al. (2006) do not 
break down their results in different technological areas, and they 
do not focus on innovation, but instead on growth. It has been 
argued that the increasingly globalised IP regime through initiatives 
such as the TRIPS agreement will diminish prospects for technology 
transfer and competition in developing countries, particularly for 
several important technology areas related to meeting sustainable 
development needs (Maskus and Reichman 2017).
In principle, patent holders are not required to take their protected 
invention into use, and neither have the obligation to allow 
(i.e., license) others to use the inventions in question (high evidence, 
high agreement). Studies have shown that the way patent holders 
use their patent differs considerably across industrial sectors: 
in pharmaceutics, patents are typically used to enable exclusive 
production of a certain good (and obtain monopoly rents), while in 
industries such as computers, semiconductors, and communications, 
patents are often used to strengthen positions in cross-licensing 
negotiations and to generate licensing income (Cohen et al. 2000; 
Foray 2004). There are also companies that predominantly obtain 
patents for defensive reasons: they seek freedom to design and 
manufacture, and by owning a  patent portfolio themselves, they 
hope to prevent becoming the target of litigation by other patent 
holders (Hall and Ziedonis 2001). Patents are often used strategically 
to impede the development and diffusion of competing, alternative 
products, processes or services, by employing strategies known as 
‘blanketing’ and ‘fencing’ (Grandstrand 2000), although the research 
is not specific to the climate space.
There are notable but specific exceptions to the general principle that 
patent holders are not obliged to license their patent to others. These 
exceptions include the compulsory licence, fair, reasonable and non-
discriminatory (FRAND) policies, and statement on licences of right 
(high evidence, high agreement). While patent holders are, in principle, 
free to choose not to license their innovation, there are three important 
exceptions to this. First, most national patent laws have provisions for 
compulsory licensing, meaning that a government allows someone 
else to produce a patented product or process without the consent of 
the patent holder, or plans to use the patent-protected invention itself 
(WTO 2020). Compulsory licences may be issued in cases of public 
interest or events of abuse of the patent (WIPO 2008; Biadgleng 
2009). Compulsory licensing is explicitly allowed in the WTO TRIPS 
agreement, and its use in context of medicine (for instance, to control 
diseases of public health importance, including HIV, tuberculosis and 
malaria) is further clarified in the ‘DOHA Declaration’ from 2001 
(Reichman 2009; WHO 2020). Second, standard-setting organisations have policies to include patented inventions in their standards only 
if the patent holder is willing to commit FRAND licensing conditions 
for those patents (Contreras 2015). While a patent holder can choose 
not to make such a commitment, by doing so, its patent is no longer 
a candidate for inclusion in the standard. In the (many) fields where 
standards are of key importance, it is very unusual for patent holders 
not to be willing to enter into FRAND commitments (Bekkers 2017). 
Third, when a patent holder files at the patent office and opts for the 
‘licence of right’ regime, in return for reduced patent fees, they enter 
into a contractual agreement that obliges them to license the patent 
to those who request it. While not all national patent systems feature 
this regime, it is a feature present in the new European Community 
patent (EPO 2017), and may therefore increase in importance.
For a discussion on the impact of intellectual property rights (IPR) on 
international technology diffusion, see Box 16.9 in Section 16.5.
16.4.7 Sub-national Innovation Policies 
and Industrial Clusters
Research examining the impacts of sub-national policies on 
innovation and competitiveness is sporadic – regional variations have 
been quantitatively assessed in the USA or China, or with case studies 
in these and other countries. Research on wind energy in the USA, 
distributed PV balance of systems in China, and renewable energy 
technologies in Italy have found that policies that incentivised local 
demand were associated with inducing innovation, measured with 
patents (Corsatea 2016; Fu et al. 2018; Gao and Rai 2019). Different 
policies may have different impacts – for example, in the USA, state-
level tax incentives and subsidies induced innovation within the 
state; but for renewable portfolio standards, policies in other states 
were associated with innovation because of impact on demand, but 
own-state policies were not (Fu et al. 2018). Research has also noted 
that the outcomes of policy and regulation on innovation are spatially 
heterogenous, because of differences in local planning authorities 
and capabilities (Corsatea 2016; Song et al. 2019).
Sub-national deployment policies have been associated with different 
impacts on competitiveness metrics (limited evidence, medium 
agreement). Research on green jobs shows positive association 
between sub-national policies and green jobs or green firms at the 
metropolitan level as well as the state of provincial level, in both 
China and the USA (Yi 2013; Yi and Liu 2015; Lee 2017), while others 
find no impact of renewable portfolio standards on green job growth 
in the state (Bowen et al. 2013). Other examples of competitiveness 
are in the impact of regional green industrial policy in Brazil’s Rio 
Grande do Sul region in attracting auctioned contracts for wind 
energy (Adami et al. 2017) or in the changes in net positive state 
revenues associated with removing tax incentives for wind producers 
in Idaho in the USA (Black et al. 2014).
Sub-national policies also directly support innovation and 
competitiveness through green incubators and direct grants or R&D 
funding for local companies working on clean energy, intending to 
promote local economic development (limited evidence, medium 
agreement). The literature on the impacts of such policies on innovation 
and competitiveness is sparse. Some case studies and programme 
evaluation reports, primarily in the USA, have identified the impacts 
of sub-national policies on competitiveness —  for example, job 
creation from direct R&D funding in North Carolina (Hall and Link 
2015), perceptions for local industry development and support for 
follow-on financing for companies receiving state-funded grants in 
Colorado (Surana et al. 2020b), and return on investments for the 
state in research and innovation spending from the New York state’s 
energy agency (NYSERDA 2020). There is a general paucity of metrics 
on innovation and competitiveness for systematic assessments of 
such programmes in developed countries, and even more so in India 
and other developing countries where such programmes have been 
increasing (Gonsalves and Rogerson 2019; Surana et al. 2020a).
Although states and local governments increasingly support clean 
energy deployment as well as directly support innovation, given its 
link with economic development goals, there is a lack of systematic 
research on the impacts of these policies at the subnational level. 
More research  – qualitative and quantitative, and in developed 
and developing countries  – is needed to systematically develop 
evidence on these impacts and to understand the reasons behind 
regional differences in terms of the type of policy as well as the 
capabilities in the region.
16.4.8 System-oriented Policies and Instruments
Although previous sections summarised the research disentangling 
the role of individual policies in advancing or hindering innovation 
(as well as impacts on other objectives), other research has tried 
to characterise the impact of a policy mix on a particular outcome. 
Although the outcome studied was not innovation, but diffusion 
(technology effectiveness is in the set of criteria outlined in 
Chapter 13), it seems relevant to discuss overall findings. Research 
reviewing renewable energy policies in nine OECD countries 
concludes that, over time, a  broad set of policies characterised by 
a ‘balance’ metric has been put in place. This research also identifies 
a  significant negative association between the balance of policies 
in renewable energy and the diffusion of total renewable energy 
capacity, but no significant effect of the overall intensity (coded as 
the 46 weighted average of six indicators) on renewable capacity 
(Schmidt and Sewerin 2019). This indicates that a neutral conception 
of balance across all possible policies may not be desirable, and that 
policy mix intensity by itself does not explain technology diffusion.
A growing body of research aims to understand how different 
policies interact and how to characterise policy mixes (del Río 2010; 
Howlett and del Rio 2015; Rogge and Reichardt 2016; del Río and 
Cerdá 2017). The empirical impact on the innovation outcomes 
is not yet discussed. A more detailed discussion of this literature is 
located in Chapter 13.
An emerging stream of research in complex systems suggests that 
relatively small changes in policy near a  possible tipping point in 
climate impacts in areas, including changing strategies related 
to investments in innovation, could trigger large positive societal 
feedbacks in the long term (Farmer et al. 2019; Otto et al. 2020).16.5 International Technology Transfer and 
Cooperation for Transformative Change
This section covers international transfer and cooperation in relation 
to climate-related technologies, ‘the flows of know-how, experience 
and equipment for mitigating and adapting to climate change 
amongst different stakeholders’ (IPCC 2000) as well as innovation 
to support transformative change compared to AR5 (IPCC 2014) 
and the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR1.5) 
(IPCC 2018a). This complements the discussion on international 
cooperation on science and technology in Chapter 14.
This section first outlines the needs and opportunities for 
international transfer and cooperation on low-emission technologies. 
It then describes the main objectives and roles of these activities, 
and then reviews recent institutional approaches within and outside 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to 
support international technology transfer and cooperation. Finally, it 
discusses emerging ideas for international technology transfer and 
cooperation, and possible modifications to support the achievement 
of climate change and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
building up to Section 16.6.
16.5.1 International Cooperation on Technology 
Development and Transfer: Needs 
and Opportunities
With the submission of their Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) as part of the Paris Agreement, most developing countries are 
now engaged in climate mitigation and adaptation. While technology 
is seen as one of the ‘means of implementation’ of climate action, 
developing countries often have relatively limited technology 
innovation capabilities, which requires them to access technologies 
developed in higher-income countries with stronger innovation 
systems (Popp 2011; Binz et al. 2012; Urban 2018). In many cases, 
these technologies require adaptation for the local context and needs 
(Sagar 2009; Anadon et al. 2016b), and innovation capabilities are 
required to suitably adapt these technologies for local use and also 
to create new markets and business models that are required for 
successful deployment (Sagar 2009; Ockwell et al. 2015; Ockwell and 
Byrne 2016). This can lead to dependencies on foreign knowledge 
and providers (Ockwell and Byrne 2016), negative impacts in terms of 
higher costs (Huenteler et al. 2016a), balance of payments constraints, 
and vulnerability to external shocks (Ebeling 2020).
The climate technology transition can also yield other development 
benefits, for instance better health, increased energy access, 
poverty alleviation and economic competitiveness (Deng et al. 
2018), including industrial development, job creation and economic 
growth (Porter and Van der Linde 1995; Altenburg and Rodrik 
2017; Lema et al. 2020; Pegels and Altenburg 2020) (Section 16.6). 
The growing complexity of technologies and global competition 
have made technology development a globalised process involving 
the flow of knowledge and products across borders (Lehoux et al. 
2014; Koengkan et al. 2020). For instance, in electronics production, 
Asian economies have captured co-location synergies and dominate 
production and assembly of product components, whereas American 
firms have adopted ‘design-only’ strategies (Tassey 2014). In the 
context of renewable energy technologies, ‘green global division of 
labour’ has been observed, with countries specialising in investments 
in research and development (R&D), manufacturing or deployment of 
renewables (Lachapelle et al. 2017). In the case of solar photovoltaic 
(PV), for example, while many technical innovations emerged from 
the USA, Japan and China emphasised the manufacture of physical 
modules (Deutch and Steinfeld 2013) (Box 16.4).
Such globalisation of production and supply chains opens up 
economic development opportunities for developing countries 
(Lema et al. 2020). At the same time, not all countries benefit from 
the globalisation of innovation – barriers remain related to finance, 
environmental performance, human capabilities and cost (Weiss and 
Bonvillian 2013; Egli et al. 2018), with developing countries being 
particularly disadvantaged at leveraging these opportunities. The gap 
in low-carbon technology innovation between countries appears to 
have reduced only among OECD countries (Yan et al. 2017; Du and 
Li 2019; Du et al. 2019) and the lower-income countries are not 
able to benefit as much from low-carbon technologies. For instance, 
in the case of agriculture, Fuglie (2018) notes that international 
R&D spillovers seem to have benefitted developed countries more 
than developing countries. Gross et al. (2018) also argue that the 
development timescales for new energy technologies can extend 
up to 70 years, even within one country. They recommend that 
innovation efforts be balanced between early-stage R&D spending, 
and commercialising already low-emission technologies in the 
demonstration phase and diffusing them globally.
Thus international cooperation on technology development and 
transfer can enable developing countries to achieve their climate 
goals more effectively, while also addressing other SDGs  – taking 
advantage, where possible, of the globalisation of innovation and 
production (Lema et al. 2020). Earlier assessments in AR5 and SR1.5 
have made it clear that international technology transfer and 
cooperation could play a role in climate policy at both the international 
and the domestic policy level (Somanathan et al. 2014; Stavins et al. 
2014; IPCC 2018b) and for low-carbon development at the regional 
level (Agrawala et al. 2014). The Paris Agreement also reflects this 
view by noting that countries shall strengthen cooperative action on 
technology development and transfer regarding two main aspects: 
(i) promoting collaborative approaches to R&D; and (ii) facilitating 
access to technology to developing country Parties (UNFCCC 2015). 
Furthermore, both in literature and in UNFCCC deliberations, South-
South technology transfer is highlighted (Khosla et al. 2017) as 
a complement to the transfer of technology and know-how from the 
North to the South.
This is consistent with literature that suggests that greenhouse 
gas (GHG) mitigation in developing countries can be enhanced by: 
(i) technology development and transfer collaboration and a ‘needs-
driven’ approach; (ii) development of the specific types of capacity 
required across the entire innovation chain; and (iii) strengthening of 
the coordination and agendas across and between governance levels 
(including domestic and international levels) (Khosla et al. 2017; 
Zhou 2019; Upadhyaya et al. 2020).16.5.2 Objectives and Roles of International Technology 
Transfer and Cooperation Efforts
International efforts involving technology transfer can have different 
objectives and roles. These include access to knowledge and 
financial resources as well as promotion of new industries in both 
the developed and recipient country (Huh and Kim 2018). Based 
on an econometric analysis of international technology transfer 
factors and characteristics of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
projects, Gandenberger et al. (2016) find that complexity and novelty 
of technologies explain whether a CDM project includes hardware 
technology transfer, and that factors like project size and absorptive 
capacity of the host country do not seem to be drivers. Halleck Vega 
and Mandel (2018) argue that ‘long-term economic relations’, for 
instance being part of a customs union, affect technological diffusion 
between countries in the case of wind energy, and indicate that this 
has resulted in low-income countries being largely overlooked.
There is some literature studying whether technology cooperation 
could complement or replace international cooperation based on 
emission reductions, such as in the Kyoto Protocol, and whether 
that would have positive impacts on climate change mitigation and 
compliance. A handful of papers conducted game-theoretic analysis on 
technology cooperation, sometimes as an alternative for cooperation 
on emission reductions, and found partially positive effects (Bosetti 
et al. 2017; Narita and Wagner 2017; Rubio 2017; Verdolini and 
Bosetti 2017). However, Sarr and Swanson (2017) model that, due to 
the rebound effect, technology development and transfer of resource-
saving technologies may not lead to envisioned emission reductions.
While technology cooperation can be aimed at emission reduction 
through mitigation projects, as indicated above, not all cooperative 
actions directly result in mitigation outcomes. Overall, technology 
transfer broadly has focused on: (i) enhanced climate technology 
absorption and deployment in developing countries; and 
(ii)  enhanced research, development and demonstration (RD&D) 
through cooperation and knowledge spillovers.
16.5.2.1 Enhancing Low-emission Technology Uptake 
in Developing Countries
Real-world outcomes in terms of low-emission technology 
deployment in developing countries may vary significantly, depending 
on the nature of the international engagement and the domestic 
context. While there has been some success in the enhancement 
of technology deployment through technology transfer in some 
developing countries (de la Tour et al. 2011; Zhang and Gallagher 
2016), many others, and particularly least-developed countries, 
are lagging behind (Glachant and Dechezleprêtre 2017). Glachant 
and Dechezleprêtre (2017) indicate that this is due to the lack of 
participation in economic globalisation and that climate negotiations 
could facilitate technology transfer to those countries through the 
creation of global demand for low-emission technologies through 
stronger mitigation targets that will result in lowering of costs and 
therefore enhanced technology diffusion. A  broader perspective 
presents a host of other factors that govern technology diffusion and 
commercialisation in developing countries, including: investment; 
social, cultural and behavioural, marketing and market building; 
macroeconomics; and support policy (Bakhtiar et al. 2020). Ramos 
Mejía et al. (2018) indicate that the governance of low-emission 
technology transfer and deployment in developing countries is 
frequently negatively affected by a mixture of well- and ill-functioning 
institutions  – for instance, in a  context of market imperfection, 
clientelist and social exclusive communities and patrimonial and/
or marketised states. Furthermore, existing interests, such as fossil 
fuel production, may also impede the deployment of low-emission 
technologies, as highlighted in case studies of Vietnam and Indonesia 
(Dorband et al. 2020; Ordonez et al. 2021). It is for such reasons that 
both domestic efforts and international engagement are seen as 
necessary to facilitate technology transfer as well as deployment in 
developing countries (Boyd 2012). The same has been seen as true 
in the case of agriculture, where the very successful international 
research efforts of the CGIAR – with remarkably favourable benefit-
cost ratios (Alston et al. 2021) – were complemented by the national 
agricultural research systems for effective uptake of high-yielding 
varieties of crops (Evenson and Gollin 2003).
One key area for underpinning effective technology uptake in 
developing countries relates to capabilities for managing technological 
change. This includes the capabilities to innovate, implement, and 
undertake integrated planning. There is much research to indicate 
that the ability of a  country’s firms to adopt new technologies is 
determined by its absorptive capacity, which includes its own R&D 
activities, human capacity (e.g.,  technical personnel), government 
involvement (including institutional capacity), the infrastructure in the 
country (Kumar et al. 1999), and knowledge and capacity as part of its 
‘intangible assets’ or the ‘software’ (Ockwell et al. 2015; da Silva et al. 
2019; Corsi et al. 2020). For sustainable development, the capacity 
to plan in an integrated way and implement the SDGs (Khalili et al. 
2015; Elder et al. 2016), including using participatory approaches 
(Disterheft et al. 2015), is a  conditional means of implementation. 
It also is argued that, if human capital were the focus of international 
climate negotiations as well as national climate policy, it could 
change the political economy in favour of climate mitigation, which 
is needed for developing such capabilities in advance to keep up with 
the required speed of transformation (Ockwell et al. 2015; Hsu 2017; 
IPCC 2018b; Upadhyaya et al. 2020). In a  global analysis of wind 
energy using econometric analysis, Halleck-Vega et al. (2018) lend 
quantitative credibility to the claim that a  technology skill base is 
a  key determinant of technological diffusion. Activities to enhance 
capabilities include informational contacts, research activities, 
consulting, education and training, and activities related to technical 
facilities (Huh and Kim 2018; Khan et al. 2020).
There are multiple studies drawing on empirical work that also 
support this conclusion. For South-South technology transfer between 
India and Kenya, not just technical characteristics, but also mutual 
learning on how to address common problems of electricity access 
and poverty, was suggested as an important condition for success 
(Ulsrud et al. 2018). Olawuyi (2018) discusses the specific capability 
gap in Africa, despite decades of technology transfer efforts under 
various mechanisms and programmes of the UNFCCC.  The study 
suggests that barriers need to be resolved by African countries 
themselves, in particular: inadequate access to information about imported climate technologies; lack of domestic capacities to 
deploy and maintain imported technologies; the weak regulatory 
environment to stimulate clean technology entrepreneurship; the 
absence or inadequacy of climate change laws; and weak legal 
protection for imported technologies. Moreover, Ziervogel et al. 
(2021) indicate that, for transformative adaptation, transdisciplinary 
approaches and capacity-building shifting, ‘the co-creation of 
contextual understandings’ instead of top-down transfer of existing 
knowledge would deliver better results. Despite the understanding of 
the importance of the capacity issue, significant gaps still remain on 
this front (TEC 2019) (Section 16.5.4).
16.5.2.2 Enhancing RD&D and Knowledge Spillovers
As mentioned earlier, RD&D can aid the development of new 
technologies as well as their adoption for new use contexts. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that international cooperation on RD&D 
is identified as a  mechanism to promote low-carbon innovation 
(Suzuki 2015; Mission Innovation 2019; TEC 2021). This has resulted 
in a  variety of international initiatives to cooperate on technology 
in order to create knowledge spillovers and develop capacity. For 
example, the UNFCCC Technology Mechanism, among other things, 
aims to facilitate finance for RD&D of climate technologies by helping 
with readiness activities for developing country actors. In particular 
preparing early-stage technologies for a  smoother transition to 
deployment and commercialisation has been emphasised in the 
context of the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) (TEC 2017). 
There are numerous multilateral, bilateral and private programmes that 
have facilitated RD&D, biased mostly towards mitigation (as opposed 
to adaptation) activities. Many programmes that seemed to be 
about RD&D were in reality dialogues about research coordination 
(Ockwell et al. 2015). There are also a  variety of possible bilateral 
and multilateral models and approaches for engaging in joint R&D 
(Mission Innovation 2019). An update by the TEC (2021) reviewing 
good practices in international cooperation of technology confirmed 
the conclusions of Ockwell et al. (2015), and moreover highlighted 
that most initiatives are led by the public sector, and that the private 
sector tended to get involved only in incubation, commercialisation 
and diffusion phases. It also concluded that, although participation of 
larger, higher-income developing countries seems to have increased, 
participation of least-developed countries is still very low.
16.5.3 International Technology Transfer and 
Cooperation: Recent Institutional Approaches
The sections below discuss the literature on various categories of 
international technology cooperation and transfer.
16.5.3.1 UNFCCC Technology and Capacity-building Institutions
Technology development and transfer have been a part of UNFCCC 
discussions and developments in the context of the international 
climate negotiations ever since its agreement in 1992, as assessed in 
AR5 (Stavins et al. 2014). Support on ‘Technology Needs Assessment’ 
to developing countries was the first major action undertaken by 
the UNFCCC, and this has undergone different cycles of learning 
(Nygaard and Hansen 2015; Hofman and van der Gaast 2019). 
Since 2009, the UNFCCC discussions on technology development 
and transfer have focused on the Technology Mechanism under the 
Cancun Agreements of 2010, which can be seen as the global climate 
governance answer to redistributive claims by developing countries 
(McGee and Wenta 2014). The Technology Mechanism consists 
of the TEC and the Climate Technology Centre & Network (CTCN). 
An independent review of CTCN, evaluated it on five dimensions – 
relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impacts and sustainability – and 
indicated that the organisation is achieving its mandate in all these 
dimensions, although there are some possible areas of improvement. 
The review also specifically noted that ‘the lack of predictability 
and security over financial resources significantly affected 
the CTCN’s ability to deliver services at the expected level, as did the 
CTCN’s lack of human and organizational resources and the capacity 
of NDEs [National Designated Entities].’ (TEC 2017). The CTCN has 
overcome some of the limitations imposed by resource constraints 
by acting as a  matchmaker from an open-innovation perspective 
(Lee and Mwebaza 2020). The CTCN’s lack of financial sustainability 
has been a  recurring issue, which may potentially be resolved by 
deepening the linkage between the CTCN and Green Climate Fund 
(Oh 2020). In the meanwhile, the Green Climate Fund is planning to establish the Climate Innovation Facility to support and accelerate 
early-stage innovations and climate technologies through the 
establishment of regional innovation hubs and climate accelerators 
as well as a climate growth fund (Green Climate Fund 2020).
The ‘technology’ discussion has been further strengthened by the 
Paris Agreement, in which Article 10 is fully devoted to technology 
development and transfer (UNFCCC 2015). However, the political 
discussions around technology continue to be characterised by 
viewing technology mostly as hardware (Haselip et al. 2015), and 
relatively limited in scope (de Coninck and Sagar 2017). The workplans 
of the TEC and the CTCN do, however, indicate a broadening of the 
perspective on technology (CTCN 2019; TEC 2019).
Since the Kyoto Protocol’s CDM has been operational, studies have 
assessed its hypothesised contribution to technology transfer, 
including transfer of knowledge. Though not an explicit objective 
of the CDM, numerous papers have investigated whether CDM 
projects contribute to technology transfer (Michaelowa et al. 2019). 
The literature varies in its assessment. Some find extensive use 
of domestic technology and hence lower levels of international 
technology transfer (Doranova et al. 2010), while others indicate Box 16.8 | Capacity Building and Innovation for Early Warning Systems in Small Island 
Developing States
One of the areas of international cooperation on capacity building is adaptation, which has been highlighted by both the Technology 
Executive Committee (TEC) (Ockwell et al. 2015; TEC 2015) and the Paris Committee on Capacity-building (UNFCCC 2020b) as an area 
where capacity gaps remain, especially in Small Island Developing States (SIDS).
While adaptation was initially conceived primarily in terms of infrastructural adjustments to long-term changes in average conditions 
(e.g., rising sea levels), a key innovation in recent years has been to couple such long-term risk management to existing efforts to 
manage disaster risk, specifically including early warning systems, enabling early action in the face of climate- and weather-risk at 
much shorter timescales (IPCC 2012), with potentially significant rates of return (Rogers and Tsirkunov 2010; Hallegatte 2012; Global 
Commission on Adaptation 2019).
In recent years, deliberate international climate finance investments have focused on ensuring that developing countries (and especially 
SIDS and least-developed countries) have access to improvements in hydrometeorological observations, modelling, and prediction 
capacity, sometimes with a particular focus on the people intended to benefit from the information produced (CREWS 2016). For 
instance, on the Eastern Caribbean SIDS of Dominica, researchers took a community-based approach to identify the mediating factors 
affecting the challenges to coastal fishing communities in the aftermath of two extreme weather events (in particular hurricane Maria 
in 2017) (Turner et al. 2020). Adopting an adaptive capacity framework (Cinner et al. 2018), they identified ‘intangible resources’ that 
people relied on in their post-disaster response as important for starting up fishery, but also went beyond that framework to conclude 
that the response ability on the part of governmental organisations as well as other actors (e.g., fish vendors) in the supply chain is also 
a requirement for rebuilding and restarting income-generating activity (Turner et al. 2020). Numerous other studies have highlighted 
capacity-building as adaptation priorities (Basel et al. 2020; Kuhl et al. 2020; Sarker et al. 2020; Vogel et al. 2020; Williams et al. 2020).
One of several helpful innovations in these efforts is impact-based forecasting (Harrowsmith et al. 2020), which provides forecasts 
targeted at the impact of the hazard rather than simply the meteorological variable. This enables a much easier coupling to early 
action in response to the information, and a more appropriate response afterwards. Automatic responses to warnings have also 
been adopted in the humanitarian field for anticipatory action ahead of (rather than simply in response to) disasters triggered by 
natural hazards (Coughlan de Perez et al. 2015). This has resulted in a rapid scale-up of such anticipatory financing mechanisms to 
tens of countries over the past few years, and emerging evidence of its effectiveness. Still, the response is lacking in coherence and 
comprehensiveness, resulting in calls for a more systematic evidence agenda for anticipatory action (Weingärtner et al. 2020).
that around 40% of projects feature hardware or other types of 
international transfer of technology (Seres et al. 2009; Murphy et al. 
2015), depending on the nature of technology, the host country and 
region (Cui et al. 2020) and the project type (Karakosta et al. 2012). 
The CDM was generally positively evaluated on its contribution to 
technology transfer. However, it was also regarded critically as the 
market-responsiveness and following of export implies a bias to larger, 
more advanced economies rather than those countries most in need 
of technology transfer (Gandenberger et al. 2016), although some 
countries have managed to correct that by directing the projects, sub-
nationally, to provinces with the greatest need (Bayer et al. 2016). 
Also, the focus on hardware in evaluations of technology transfer 
under the CDM has been criticised (Haselip et al. 2015; Michaelowa 
et al. 2019). Indeed, although many studies do go beyond hardware 
in their evaluations (e.g., Murphy et al. 2015), the degree to which 
the project leads to a change in the national system of innovation or 
institutional capacity development is not commonly assessed, or has 
been assessed as limited (de Coninck and Puig 2015).
There is significantly less literature on capacity building under 
the UNFCCC, especially as it relates to managing the technology 
transition. In a  legal analysis, D’Auvergne and Nummelin (2017) 
indicate the nature, scope and principles of Article 11 on capacity 
building of the Paris Agreement as being demand- and country-
driven, following a needs approach, fostering national, subnational 
and local ownership, and being iterative, incorporating the lessons 
learnt, as well as participatory, cross-cutting and gender-response. 
They also highlight that it is novel that least-developed countries 
and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) are called out as the most 
vulnerable and most in need of capacity building, and that it raises 
a ‘legal expectation’ that all parties ‘should’ cooperate to enhance the 
capacity in developing countries to implement the Paris Agreement. 
These aspects are reflected in the terms of reference of the Paris 
Committee on Capacity-building (PCCB) that was established in 2015 
at the 21st Conference of the Parties (UNFCCC 2016; D’Auvergne 
and Nummelin 2017), and was extended by five years at the 25th 
Conference of the Parties in 2019 (UNFCCC 2020a, b). In its work 
plan for 2020–2024, its aims include ‘identifying capacity gaps and 
needs, both current and emerging, and recommending ways to 
address them’.An example of how innovative technologies combined with capacity 
development, and how institutional innovation is combined in the 
context of adaptation to extreme weather in SIDS can be found in 
Box 16.8.
From the broader assessment above, despite limitations of available 
information, it is clear that the number of initiatives and activities 
on international cooperation and technology transfer and capacity 
building seem to have been enhanced since the Cancun Agreements 
and the Paris Agreement (TEC 2021). However, much more can be 
done, given the complexity and magnitude of the requirements in 
terms of coverage of activities, the amount of committed funding, 
and its effectiveness. Some assessments of UNFCCC instruments 
specifically for technology transfer to developing countries have 
indicated that functions such as knowledge development, market 
formation and legitimacy in developing countries’ low-emission 
technological innovation systems would need much more support to 
fulfil the Paris Agreement goals (de Coninck and Puig 2015; Ockwell 
et al. 2015); such areas would benefit from continued attention, 
given their role in the overall climate technology transition.
16.5.3.2 International RD&D Cooperation 
and Capacity-building Initiatives
Besides the UNFCCC mechanisms, there are numerous other initiatives 
that promote international cooperation on RD&D as well as capacity 
building. Some of them are based on the notion of ‘mission-oriented 
innovation policy’ (Mazzucato and Semieniuk 2017; Mazzucato 2018), 
which shapes markets rather than merely corrects market failures.
For instance, Mission Innovation is a global initiative consisting of 23 
member countries and the European Commission working together 
to reinvigorate and accelerate global clean energy innovation 
with the objective to make clean energy widely affordable with 
improved reliability and secured supply of energy. The goal is to 
accelerate clean energy innovation in order to limit the rise in 
the global temperature to well below 2°C. The members seek to 
foster international collaboration among its members and increase 
public investments in clean energy R&D with the engagement 
of the private sector. A  recent assessment shows that, although 
Box 16.9 | Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Regimes and Technology Transfer
In the global context of climate mitigation technologies, it has been noted that technologies have been developed primarily in 
industrialised countries but are urgently required in fast-growing emerging economies (Dechezleprêtre et al. 2011). International 
technology transfers can take place via three primary channels: (i) trade in goods, where technology is embedded in products; 
(ii) Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), where enterprises transfer firm-specific technology to foreign affiliates; and (iii) patent licences, 
where third parties obtain the right to use technologies. IPRs are relevant for all these three channels.
Not surprisingly, the role of IPRs in international transfer of climate mitigation technologies has been much discussed but also 
described as particularly controversial (Abdel-Latif 2015). The relationships between IPR, innovation, international technology transfer 
and local mitigation and adaptation are complex (Maskus 2010; Abdel-Latif 2015; Li et al. 2020) and there is no clear consensus on 
what kind of an IPR regime will be most beneficial for promoting technology transfer.
expenditures are rising, the aims were not met by 2020 (Myslikova 
and Gallagher 2020). Gross et al. (2018) caution against too much 
focus on R&D efforts for energy technologies to address climate 
change, including for Mission Innovation. They argue that, given the 
timescales of commercialisation, developing new technologies now 
would mean they would be commercially too late for addressing 
climate change. Huh and Kim (2018) discuss two ‘knowledge and 
technology transfer’ projects that were eventually not pursued 
beyond the feasibility study phase due to cooperation and 
commitment problems between national and local governments, 
and they highlight the need for ownership and engagement of local 
residents and recipient governments.
Intellectual property rights (IPR) regimes (Box 16.9) can be an enabler 
or a barrier to energy transition. For more background on IPR and 
impact on innovation, see Section 16.4.6.
16.5.4 Emerging Ideas for International Technology 
Transfer and Cooperation
As with the broader innovation literature (Section 16.3), and drawing 
on such literature, there has been an emergence of a  greater 
understanding of, and emphasis on, the role of innovation systems 
(at national, sectoral, and technological levels) as a  way to help developing countries with the climate technology transition (TEC 
2015; Ockwell and Byrne 2016). This has given rise to several 
proposals, discussed here and summarised in Figure 16.3.
Enhancing deployment and diffusion of climate technologies in 
developing countries would require a variety of actors with sufficient 
capabilities (robust evidence, medium agreement) (Kumar et al. 1999; 
Sagar et al. 2009; Ockwell et al. 2018). This may include strengthening 
existing actors (Malhotra et al. 2021), supporting science, technology, 
and innovation-based start-ups to meet social goals (Surana et al. 
2020b), and developing entities and programmes that are intended 
to address specific gaps relating to technology development and 
deployment (Sagar et al. 2009; Ockwell et al. 2018).
There is also an increasing emphasis on the relevance of 
participative social innovation, local grounding and policy learning 
as a replacement of the expert-led technological change (Chaudhary 
et al. 2012; Disterheft et al. 2015; Kowarsch et al. 2016). Others have 
suggested a shift to international innovation cooperation rather than 
technology transfer, which implies a donor-recipient relationship. The 
notion of innovation cooperation also makes more explicit the focus 
on innovation processes and systems (Pandey et al. 2021). A broad 
transformative agenda therefore proposes that contemporary societal 
challenges are complex and multivariegated in scope and will require 
the actions of a diverse set of actors to formulate and address the Several studies argue that, particularly in developing nations, the global IPR regime has resulted in delayed access, reduced competition 
and higher prices (Littleton 2008; Zhuang 2017) and that climate-change-related technology transfer is insufficiently stimulated under 
the current IPR regime. Compulsory licensing (as already used in medicine) is one of the routes proposed to repair this (Littleton 2008; 
Abdel-Latif 2015).
There is little systematic evidence that patents and other IPRs restrict access to environmentally-sound technologies, since these 
technologies are mostly in sectors based on mature technologies where numerous substitutes among global competitors are available 
(Maskus 2010). This might, however, change in the future – for instance, with new technologies based on plants, via biotechnologies 
and synthetic fuels (Maskus 2010), for which Correa et al. (2020) already find some evidence.
There is also literature suggesting that weak IPR regimes have a ‘strong and negative impact on the international diffusion of 
patented knowledge’ (Dechezleprêtre et al. 2013; Glachant and Dechezleprêtre 2017). Also, patents may support market transactions 
in technology, including international technology transfer, especially to middle-income countries and larger developing countries 
(Maskus 2010; Hall and Helmers 2019) but least-developed countries may be better served by building capacity to absorb and 
implement technology (Hall and Helmers 2010; Maskus 2010; Sanni et al. 2016; Glachant and Dechezleprêtre 2017). It is also argued 
that it is not even clear that the patent system as it exists today is the most appropriate vehicle for encouraging international access 
(Hall and Helmers 2010; Maskus 2010; Sanni et al. 2016; Glachant and Dechezleprêtre 2017). Given the large variation in perspectives 
on the role of IPRs in technology transfer, there is a need for more evidence and analysis to better understand if, and under what 
conditions, IPR may hinder or promote technology transfer (TEC 2012).
In terms of ways forward to meet the challenge of climate change, different suggestions are made in the context of IPR that can help 
to further improve international technology transfer of climate mitigation technologies, including through the Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement, by making decisions on IPR to developing countries on a case-by-case basis, by developing 
countries experimenting more with policies on IPR protection, or through brokering or patent-pooling institutions (Littleton 2009; Maskus 
and Reichman 2017; Dussaux et al. 2018). Others also suggest that distinctions among country groups be made on the basis of levels 
of technological and economic development, with least-developed countries getting particular attention (Zhuang 2017; Abbott 2018).Box 16.9 (continued)
policy, implying that social, institutional and behavioural changes 
next to technological innovations are the possible solutions (Geels 
2004) (see also Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter).
Several authors have proposed new mechanisms for international 
cooperation on technology. Ockwell and Byrne (2016) argue that 
a role for the UNFCCC Technology Mechanism could be to support 
Climate Relevant Innovation-system Builders (CRIBs) in developing 
countries, institutions locally that develop capabilities that ‘form 
the bedrock of transformative, climate-compatible, technological 
change and development’. Khan et al. (2020) propose a  specific 
variant with universities in developing countries serving as ‘central 
hubs’ for capacity building to implement the NDCs as well as other 
climate policy and planning instruments; they also suggest that 
developing countries outline their capacity-building needs more 
clearly in their NDCs.Building on an earlier discussion of technology-oriented and 
sectoral agreements (Meckling and Chung 2009) and the potential 
for international cooperation in energy-intensive industry (Åhman 
et al. 2017), where deep emission reduction measures require 
transformative changes (Chapter 11), Oberthür et al. (2021) propose 
that that a  way forward for the global governance for energy-
intensive industry could be through sub-sector ‘clubs’ that include 
governmental, private and societal actors (Oberthür et al. 2021).
Figure 16.3 summarises examples of emerging ideas for international 
cooperation on climate technology, their relation to the objectives 
and existing efforts, and the level of development of the innovation 
system around a technology (Hekkert et al. 2007; Bergek et al. 2008) 
or in nations (Lundvall et al. 2009).International climate technology 
transfer objectivesCurrent mechanisms 
and meansExamples of 
emerging ideasLess mature More matureInnovation systemEnhancing RD&D and
knowledge spillovers
Build capacity
for innovation
Build capacity for
implementation and
integrated planning
Enhancing climate
technology
implementation in
developing countriesInternational RD&D cooperation
mechanisms, e.g.
• IEA Technology
Cooperation Programmes
• CGIAR
• Mission Innovation
• Bilateral and regional initiatives
UNFCCC mechanisms
and institutions
• CDM (Kyoto Protocol)
• Technology Mechanism
(Cancun Agreements)
• Technology framework
(Paris Agreement)
• Paris Committee on
Capacity Building
Finance, trade and associated
frameworksPromoting developing country
participation in technology
cooperation programmes
Climate-Related Innovation
System Builders
Developing countries 
universities as central hubs 
of capacity building
Private sector and donor-led 
initiatives (e.g., Climate 
Innovation Centres)Sectoral agreements
• Iron & steel
• Cement
International emission
standards
• Personal vehicles
• Cooling devices
Figure  16.3 |  Examples of recent mechanisms and emerging ideas (right column) in relation to level of maturity of the national or technological 
innovation system, objectives of international climate technology transfer efforts and current mechanisms and means.  Sources: Sagar (2009); Ockwell and 
Byrne (2016); Khan et al. (2020); Oberthür et al. (2021).
16.6 Technological Change and 
Sustainable Development
This section considers technological innovation in the broader 
context of sustainable development, recognising that technological 
change happens within social and economic systems, and therefore 
technologies are conceived and applied in relation to those systems 
(Grübler 1998). Simplifications of complex interactions between 
physical and social systems and incomplete knowledge of the 
indirect effects of technological innovation may systematically lead 
to underestimation of environmental impacts and overestimation of 
our ability to mitigate climate change (Hertwich and Peters 2009; 
Arvesen et al. 2011).
Previous sections of the chapter discussed how a systemic approach, 
appropriate public policies and international cooperation on 
innovation can enhance technological innovation. This section 
provides more details on how innovation and technological change, 
sustainable development and climate change mitigation intertwine.
16.6.1 Linking Sustainable Development 
and Technological Change
Sustainable development and technological change are deeply 
related (UNCTAD 2019). Technology has been critical for increasing 
productivity as the dominant driving force for economic growth. Also, the concentration of technology in few hands has boosted 
consumption of goods and services which are not necessarily aligned 
with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Walsh et al. 2020). It 
has been suggested that, in order to address sustainable development 
challenges, science and technology actors would have to change their 
relation to policymakers (Ravetz and Funtowicz 1999) as well as the 
public (Jasanoff 2003). This has been further elaborated for the SDGs. 
The scale and ambition of the SDGs call for a change in development 
patterns that require a  fundamental shift in: current best practices; 
guidelines for technological and investment decisions; and the wider 
socio-institutional systems (UNCTAD 2019; Pegels and Altenburg 
2020). This is needed as not all innovation will lead to sustainable 
development patterns (Altenburg and Pegels 2012; Lema et al. 2015).
Current SDG implementation gaps reflect, to some extent, 
inadequate understanding of the complex relationships among the 
goals (Waiswa et al. 2019; Skene 2020), as well as their synergies and 
trade-offs, including how they limit the range of responses available 
to communities and governments, and potential injustices (Thornton 
and Comberti 2017). These relationships have been approached by 
focusing primarily on synergies and trade-offs while lacking the 
holistic perspective necessary to achieve all the goals (Nilsson et al. 
2016; Roy et al. 2018).
A more holistic framework could envisage the SDGs as outcomes of 
stakeholder engagement and learning processes directed at achieving 
a balance between human development and environmental protection Social emphasis
Environmental emphasis Low HighLow High
GREEN INNOVATIONS TRADITIONAL INNOVATIONS
• Primary focus is given to environmental dimension
and associated concerns when developing and/or
adopting this type of innovation;
• Social dimension/concerns and economic
dimension/concerns are subservient
(i.e., often compromised to maximise
environmental outcome).• Social, environmental and economic dimensions
and their associated concerns are considered in
a balanced approach when developing and/or
adopting this type of innovation;
• There is no maximisation opportunities, but
satisfactory solutions that allow all the three
pillars to be considered simultaneously.SUSTAINABLE INNOVATIONS
• Primary focus is given to the economic dimension
and associated concerns when developing and/or
adopting this type of innovation;
• Environmental dimension/concerns and social
dimension/concerns are subservient 
(i.e., often compromised to maximise 
economic/ﬁnancial outcome).• Primary focus is given to the social dimension
and associated concerns when developing
and/or adopting this type of innovation;
• Environmental dimension/concerns and
economic dimension/concerns are subservient
(i.e., often compromised to maximise 
social outcome).SOCIAL INNOVATIONS
Figure 16.4 | Considerations and typology of innovations for sustainable development.  Source: Silvestre and Ţîrcă (2019).
(Gibbons 1999; Jasanoff 2003), to the extent that the two can be 
separated. From a science, technology and innovation perspective, Fu 
et al. (2019) distinguish three categories of SDGs. The first category 
comprises those SDGs representing essential human needs for which 
inputs that put pressure on sustainable development would need 
to be minimised. These include Zero hunger (SDG 2), Clear water 
and sanitation (SDG 6) and Affordable and clean energy (SDG 7) 
resources, which continue to rely on production technologies and 
practices that are eroding ecosystem services, potentially hampering 
the realisation of SDGs 15 (Life on land) and 14 (Life below water) 
(Díaz et al. 2019). The second category includes those related to 
governance and which compete with each other for scarce resources, 
such as Industry, innovation and infrastructure (SDG 9) and Climate 
action (SDG 13), which require an interdisciplinary perspective. The 
third category are those that require maximum realisation, include 
No poverty (SDG 1), Quality education (SDG 4) and Gender equality 
(SDG 5) (Fu et al. 2019).
Resolving tensions between the SDGs requires adoption and 
mainstreaming of novel technologies that can meet needs while 
reducing resource waste and improving resource-use efficiency, and 
acknowledging the systemic nature of technological innovation, 
which involves many levels of actors, stages of innovation and scales 
(Anadon et al. 2016b). Changes in production technology have been 
found effective to overcome trade-offs between food and water 
goals (Gao and Bryan 2017). Innovative technologies at the food, 
water and energy nexus are transforming production processes 
in industrialised and developing countries, such as developments in 
agrivoltaics, which is co-development of land for agriculture and solar 
with water conservation benefits (Barron-Gafford et al. 2019; Lytle 
et al. 2020; Schindele et al. 2020), and other renewably powered 
low- to zero-carbon food, water and energy systems (He et al. 2019). 
Silvestre and Ţîrcă (2019) indicate that maximising both social and environmental aims is not possible, but that sustainable innovations 
include satisfactory solutions for social, environmental and economic 
pillars (Figure 16.4).
There is evidence that technological changes can catalyse 
implementation of the reforms needed to the manner in which goods 
and services are distributed among people (Fu et al. 2019). A recently 
developed theoretical framework based on a  capability approach 
(CA) has been used to evaluate the quality of human life and the 
process of development (Haenssgen and Ariana 2018). Variations of 
the CA have been applied to exploratory studies of the link between 
technological change, human development, and economic growth 
(Mayer 2001; Mormina 2019). This suggests that the transformative 
potential of technology as an enabling condition is not intrinsic, 
but is assigned to it by people within a given technological context. 
A failure to recognise and account for this property of technology is 
a  root cause of many failed attempts at techno-fixing sustainable 
development projects (Stilgoe et al. 2013; Fazey et al. 2020).
The basic rationale for governance of technological change is the 
creation and maintenance of an enabling environment for climate 
and SDG-oriented technological change (Avelino et al. 2019). Such 
an environment poses high demands on governance and policy to 
coordinate with actors and provide a  direction for innovation and 
technological change. Cross-Chapter Box  12 illustrates how the 
dynamics of socio-technical transitions and shifting development 
pathways towards sustainable development offer options for 
policymakers and other actors to accelerate the system transitions 
needed for both climate change mitigation and sustainable 
development. Governance interventions to implement the SDGs will 
need to be operationalised at sub-national, national and global levels 
and support integration of resource concerns in policy, planning and 
implementation (UNEP 2015; Williams et al. 2020).
Cross-Chapter Box 12 | Transition Dynamics
Authors: Anthony Patt (Switzerland), Heleen de Coninck (the Netherlands), Xuemei Bai (Australia), Paolo Bertoldi (Italy), Sarah Burch 
(Canada), Clara Caiafa (Brazil/the Netherlands), Felix Creutzig (Germany), Renée van Diemen (the Netherlands/United Kingdom), 
Frank Geels (United Kingdom/the Netherlands), Michael Grubb (United Kingdom), María Josefina Figueroa Meza (Venezuela/Denmark), 
Şiir Kilkiş (Turkey), Jonathan Köhler (Germany), Catherine Mitchell (United Kingdom), Lars J. Nilsson (Sweden), Patricia Perkins (Canada), 
Yamina Saheb (France/Algeria), Harald Winkler (South Africa)
Introduction
Numerous studies suggest that transformational changes would be required in many areas of society if climate change is to be limited 
to 2°C warming or less. Many of these involve shifts to low-carbon technologies, such as renewable energy, which typically involve 
changes in associated regulatory and social systems; others more explicitly concern behavioural shifts, such as towards plant-based 
diets or cleaner cooking fuels, or, at the broadest level, a shift in development pathways. Chapter 1 establishes an analytic framework 
focusing on transitions, which chapters 5, 13, 14, 15 and 16 further develop. In this Cross-Chapter Box, we provide a complementary 
overview of the dynamics of different kinds of transformational changes for climate mitigation and sustainable development. We first 
focus on insights from socio-technical transitions approaches, and then expand to broader system transitions.
Dynamics of socio-technical transitions
A large volume of literature documents the processes associated with transformational changes in technology and the social systems 
associated with their production and use (Geels 2019; Köhler et al. 2019). Transformational technological change typically goes hand 
in hand with shifts in knowledge, behaviour, institutions, and markets (Geels and Schot 2010; Markard et al. 2012); stickiness in these 
factors often keeps society ‘locked in’ to those technologies already in widespread use, rather than allowing a shift to new ones – 
even those that offer benefits (David 1985; Arthur 1994). Exceptions often follow consistent patterns (Geels 2002; Unruh 2002); since 
AR5 a growing number of scholars have suggested using these insights to design more effective climate policies and actions (Geels 
et al. 2017). Chapter 1 (Section 1.7 and Figure 1.6) represents technology diffusion and a corresponding shift in policy emphasis 
as a continuous process; it is also useful to identify a sequence of distinct stages that typically occur, associating each stage with 
a distinct set of processes, challenges, and effective policies (Patt and Lilliestam 2018; Victor et al. 2019). Consistent with elsewhere 
in this report (Section 5.5.2 and Supplementary Material 5.5.3 in Chapter 5, and Section 16.3 in Chapter 16), Cross-Chapter Box 12 
Figure 1 elaborates on four distinct stages: it portrays these as occurring in a cycle, recognising that even transformative technologies 
will eventually be replaced with newer ones.
The emergence stage is marked by experimentation, innovation in the laboratory, and demonstration in the field, to produce 
technologies and system architectures (Geels 2005). By its very nature, experimentation includes both successes and failures, and 
implies high risks. Because of these risks, especially in the case of fundamentally new technologies, government funding for research, 
development and demonstration (RD&D) projects is crucial to sustaining development (Mazzucato 2015b).
The second stage is early adoption, during which successful technologies jump from the laboratory to limited commercial application 
(Pearson and Foxon 2012). Reaching this stage is often described as crossing the ‘Valley of Death’, because the cost/performance ratio Cross-Chapter Box 12 (continued)
Barriers to change
– Cross-sectoral interactions
– Displacement of affected 
workers, asset ownersBarriers to change
– High investment costs
– High uncertainties 
and risks
Barriers to change
– Low public acceptance
– Continued mismatch with networks, 
institutions, behaviours
– Political opposition from dominant 
market actorsProcesses
– From mainstream to dominant
– Phase-out of old technologies, systems
Public policies
– Technology standards and prohibitions
– Support for displaced workers and industriesProcesses
– Research, development and demonstration
– Successes and frequent failures
Public policies
– Support for research, development, and demonstration
1. Emergence
4. Stabilisation
Processes
– Initial growth in protected 
niches
– Cost reductions, 
performance gains
– Reduction of technology 
uncertainties
Public policies
– Market incentives: 
subsidies, quotas
– Government procurement 
and tenders2. Early adoption
Processes
– Fast diffusion rates
– Restructuring of institutions, 
behaviour, and infrastructure
Public policies
– Infrastructure development
– Revised regulatory framework
– Enhancement of ﬁnancial ﬂows3. Diffusion– Economic: declining costs relative 
to performance
– Technical: expanding infrastructure 
networks
– Social: increasing public familiarity 
and acceptance
– Political: emerging industry 
support and interest groupsPositive feedbacks 
accelerating change
Cross-Chapter Box 12, Figure 1 | Stages of socio-technical transition processes.
for these new market entrants is too low for them to appear viable to investors (Murphy and Edwards 2003). A key process in the early 
adoption phase is induced innovation, a result of incremental improvements in both design and production processes, and of mass-
production of a growing share of key components (Nemet 2006; Grubb et al. 2021). There is diversity across classes of technologies, 
and learning tends to occur faster for technologies that are modular (Wilson et al. 2020) – such as photovoltaics – and slower for 
those that require site- or context-specific engineering, such as in the shift to low-carbon materials production (Malhotra and Schmidt 
2020). Public policies that create a secure return on investment for project developers can lead to learning associated with industry 
expansion (Chapter 16, Figure 16.1); typically these are economically and politically viable when they promote growth within a market 
niche, causing little disruption to the mainstream market (Roberts et al. 2018). Direct support mechanisms are effective, including 
cross-subsidies (such as feed-in tariffs) and market quotas (such as renewable portfolio standards) (Geels et al. 2017b; Patt and 
Lilliestam 2018; and Chapter 9 for assessment of early adoption policies in the building sector). The value of these policies is less in 
their immediate emissions reductions, but more in generating the conditions for self-sustaining transformational change to take place 
as technologies later move from niche to mainstream (Hanna and Victor 2021).
The third stage, diffusion, is where niche technologies become mainstream, with accelerating diffusion rates (Sections  1.7 and 
16.4), and is marked by changes to the socio-technical ‘regime’, including infrastructure networks, value chains, user practices, 
and institutions. This stage is often the most visible and turbulent, because more widespread adoption of a new technology gives 
rise to structural changes in institutions and actors’ behaviour (e.g., increased adoption of smartphones to new payment systems 
and social media), and because when incumbent market actors become threatened, they often contest policies promoting the new 
technologies (Köhler et al. 2019). In the diffusion stage, policy emphasis is shifted from financial support during the early adoption 
stage, towards supporting regime-level factors needed to sustain, or cope with, rapid and widespread diffusion (Markard 2018). 
These factors and policies are context specific. For example, Patt et al. (2019) document that the policies needed to expand residential 
charging networks for electric vehicles depend on the local structure of the housing market.
The fourth stage is stabilisation, in which the new technologies, systems, and behaviours are both standardised and insulated from 
rebound effects and backsliding (Andersen and Gulbrandsen 2020). Sectoral bans on further investment in high-carbon technologies 
may become politically feasible at this point (Breetz et al. 2018; Economidou et al. 2020). The decline of previously dominant products 
or industries can lead to calls for policymakers to help those negatively affected, enabling a just transition (McCauley and Heffron 
2018; Newell and Simms 2020). Political opposition to the system reconfiguration that comes with integration and stabilisation can 
also be overcome by offering incumbent actors an attractive exit strategy (de Gooyert et al. 2016).
Because different sectors are at different stages of low-carbon transitions, and because the barriers that policies need to address are 
stage- and often context-specific, effective policies stimulating socio-technical transitions operate primarily at the sectoral level (Victor 
et al. 2019). This is particularly the case during early adoption, where economic barriers predominate; during diffusion, policies that address 
regime-level factors often need to deal with cross-sectoral linkages and coupling, such as those between power generation, transportation, 
and heating (Patt 2015; Bloess 2019; Fridgen et al. 2020). The entire cycle can take multiple decades. However, later stages can go faster by 
building on the earlier stages that have taken place elsewhere. For example, early RD&D into wind energy took place primarily in Denmark, 
was followed by early adoption in Denmark, Germany, and Spain, before other countries, including the USA, India, and China, leapfrogged 
directly to the diffusion stage (Chaudhary et al. 2015; Dai and Xue 2015; Lacal-Arántegui 2019). A similar pattern played out for solar 
power (Nemet 2019). International cooperation, geared towards technology transfer, capacity and institution-building, and finance, can 
help ensure that developing countries leapfrog to low-carbon technologies that have undergone commercialisation elsewhere (Adenle et al. 
2015; Fankhauser and Jotzo 2018) (see also Chapter 5, Box 5.9, Chapter 15, Section 15.5, and Section 16.5 in this chapter).
This report contains numerous examples of the positive feedbacks in the centre of Cross-Chapter Box 12, Figure 1, predominantly 
arising during the early adoption and diffusion stages, and leading to rapid or unexpected acceleration of change. For example, public 
acceptance of meat alternatives leads to firms improving the products, increasing political and economic feedbacks (Section 5.4 
and Box 5.5). Declining costs in solar and wind cause new investment in the power-generation sector being dominated by those 
technologies, leading to increased political support and further cost reductions (Chapter 6). In buildings (Chapter 9) and personal mobility 
(Chapter 10), low-carbon heating systems and electric vehicles are gaining public acceptance, leading to improved infrastructure and 
human resources, more employment in those sectors, and behavioural contagion. Some have argued that technologies cross societal 
tipping points on account of these feedbacks (Obama 2017; Sharpe and Lenton 2021).
Dynamics between enabling conditions for system transitions
Abson et al. (2017) argue that it is possible to make use of ‘leverage points’ inherent in system dynamics in order to accelerate 
sustainability transitions. Otto et al. (2020) argue that interventions geared towards the social factors driving change can ‘activate Cross-Chapter Box 12 (continued)
contagious processes’ leading to the transformative changes required for climate mitigation. These self-reinforcing dynamics involve 
the interaction of enabling conditions, including public policy and governance, institutional and technological innovation capacity, 
behaviour change, and finance. For example, Mercure et al. (2018) simulated financial flows into fossil-fuel extraction, and showed 
how investors taking into account transition risk in combination with technological innovation would lead to the enhancement of 
investments in low-carbon assets and further enhanced innovation. As another example, behaviour, lifestyle, and policy can also 
initiate demand-side transitions (Tziva et al. 2020) (Chapter 5), such as with food systems (Rust et al. 2020) (Section 7.4.5), and can 
contribute to both resilience and carbon storage (Sendzimir et al. 2011) (Box 16.5).
In the urban context, the concept of sustainability experiments has been used to examine innovative policies and practices adopted 
by cities that have significant impact on transition towards low-carbon and sustainable futures (Bai et al. 2010; Castán Broto and 
Bulkeley 2013). Individual innovative practices can potentially be upscaled to achieve low-carbon transition in cities (Peng and Bai 
2018), leading to a  process of broadening and scaling innovative practices in other cities (Peng et al. 2019).  Such sustainability 
experiments give rise to new actor networks, which in some cases may accelerate change, and in others may lead to conflict (Bulkeley 
et al. 2014). As in the diffusion phase in Cross-Chapter Box 12, Figure 1, contextual factors play a strong role. Examining historical 
transitions to cycling across European cities, Oldenziel et al. (2016) found that contextual factors, including specific configurations of 
actors, can lead to very different outcomes. Kraus and Koch (2021) found a short-term social shock – such as the COVID-19 crisis – to 
lead to differential increases in cycling behaviour, contingent on other enabling conditions.
Linking system dynamics to development pathways and broader societal goals
Transition dynamics insights can be broadened to shifting development pathways. Development paths are characterised by particular 
sets of interlinking regime rules and behaviours, including inertia and cascading effects over time, and are reinforced at multiple levels, 
with varied capacities and constraints on local agency occurring at each level (Burch et al. 2014) (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 4). 
This is also observed by Schot and Kanger (2018), who identify a needed change in a ‘meta-regime’, crossing sectoral lines in linking 
value chains or infrastructure and overall development objectives. In the context of the UN climate change regime, international 
cooperation can bring together such best practices and lessons learnt (Adenle et al. 2015; Pandey et al. 2021). This is especially 
relevant for developing countries, which often depend on technologies and financial resources from abroad, witnessing their pace 
and direction influenced by transnational actors (Marquardt et al. 2016; Bhamidipati et al. 2019), and benefitting little in terms of 
participating in high value-added activities (Whittaker et al. 2020).
System transitions differ according to context, such as across industrialised and developing countries (Ramos-Mejía et al. 2018), 
and within countries. Lower levels of social capital and trust negatively impact niche commercialisation (Lepoutre and Oguntoye 
2018). In contexts of poverty and inequality, stakeholders’ – including users’ – capabilities for meaningful participation are limited, 
and transition outcomes can end up marginalising or further excluding social groups (Osongo and Schot 2017; Hansen et al. 2018). 
Many studies of transitions in developing countries make note of the importance of innovation in the informal sector (Charmes 2016) 
(Box 5.10 in Chapter 5). Facilitating informal sector access to renewable energy sources, safe and sustainable buildings, and finance 
can advance low-carbon transitions (McCauley et al. 2019; Masuku and Nzewi 2021). On the contrary, disregarding its importance can 
result in misleading or ineffective innovation and climate strategies (Maharajh and Kraemer-Mbula 2010; Mazhar and Ummad 2014; 
de Beer et al. 2016; Masuku and Nzewi 2021).
Policies shifting innovation in climate-compatible directions can also reinforce other development benefits, for instance better health, 
increased energy access, poverty alleviation and economic competitiveness (Deng et al. 2018; IPCC 2018a; Karlsson et al. 2020). 
Development benefits, in turn, can create feedback effects that sustain public support for subsequent policies, and hence help to 
secure effective long-term climate mitigation (Geels 2014; Meckling et al. 2015; Schmidt and Sewerin 2017; Breetz et al. 2018), 
increasing legitimacy of environmental sustainability actions (Hansen et al. 2018; Herslund et al. 2018; van Welie and Romijn 2018) 
and addressing negative socio-economic impacts (Deng et al. 2018; McCauley and Heffron 2018; Eisenberg 2019; Henry et al. 2020).
Summary and gaps in knowledge
Strategies to accelerate climate mitigation can be most effective at accelerating and achieving transformative change when they are 
synchronised with transition processes in systems. They address technological stage characteristics, take advantage of high-leverage 
intervention points, and respond to societal dynamics (Abson et al. 2017; Geels et al. 2017; Köhler et al. 2019). Gaps in knowledge 
remain on how to tailor policy mixes, the interaction of enabling conditions, the generalisability of socio-technical transition insights 
to other types of systems, and how to harness these insights to better shift development pathways.Cross-Chapter Box 12 (continued)
16.6.2 Sustainable Development and Technological 
Innovation: Synergies, Trade-offs and Governance
16.6.2.1 Synergies and Trade-offs
Policies that shift innovation in climate compatible directions 
can promote other development benefits, for instance, better 
health, increased energy access, poverty alleviation and economic 
competitiveness (Deng et al. 2018) (Cross-Chapter Box 12). Economic 
competitiveness co-benefits can emerge as climate mitigation 
policies trigger innovation that can be leveraged for promoting 
industrial development, job creation and economic growth, both 
in terms of localising low-emission energy technologies value 
chains as well as increased energy efficiency and avoided carbon 
lock-ins (Section  16.4). However, without adequate capabilities, 
co-benefits at the local level would be minimal, and they would 
probably materialise far from where activities take place (Ockwell 
and Byrne 2016; Vasconcellos and Caiado Couto 2021). Innovation 
and technological change can also empower citizens. Grass-roots 
innovation promotes the participation of grass-roots actors, such 
as social movements and networks of academics, activists and 
practitioners, and facilitate experimenting with alternative forms 
of knowledge creation (Seyfang and Smith 2007; UNCTAD 2019). 
Examples of ordinary people and entrepreneurs adopting and 
adapting technologies to local needs to address locally defined needs 
have been documented in the development literature (van Welie and 
Romijn 2018) (Box 16.10). Digital technologies can empower citizens 
and communities in decentralised energy systems, contributing not 
only to a more sustainable but also to a more democratic and fairer 
energy system (Van Summeren et al. 2021) (Section 5.4 in Chapter 5, 
and Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter).
Therefore, even though science, technology and innovation is an 
explicit focus of SDG 9, it is an enabler of most SDGs (UNCTAD 2019). 
Striving for synergies between innovation and technological change 
for climate change mitigation with other SDGs can help to secure 
effective long-term climate mitigation, as development benefits can 
create feedback effects that sustain public and political support for 
subsequent climate mitigation policies (Geels 2014; Meckling et al. 
2015; Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter). However, innovation is 
not always geared to sustainable development – for instance, firms 
tend to know how to innovate when value chains are left intact (Hall 
and Martin 2005), which is usually not the case in systemic transitions.
A comprehensive study of these effects distinguishes among 
‘… anticipated-intended, anticipated-unintended, and unanticipated-
unintended consequences’ (Tonn and Stiefel 2019). Theoretical and 
empirical studies have demonstrated that unintended consequences 
are typical of complex adaptive systems, and while a  few are 
predictable, a  much larger number are not (Sadras 2020). Even 
when unintended consequences are unanticipated, they can be 
prevented through actor responses, for instance, rebound effects 
following the introduction of energy-efficient technologies. Other 
examples of unintended consequences include worse-than-expected 
physical damage to infrastructure and resistance from communities 
in the rapidly growing ocean renewable energy sector (Quirapas and Taeihagh 2020), and gaps between expected and actual performance 
of building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) technology (Boyd and 
Schweber 2018; Gram-Hanssen and Georg 2018). In the agricultural 
sector, new technologies and associated practices that target the 
fitness of crop pests have been found to favour resistant variants. 
Unintended consequences of digitalisation are reported as well 
(Lynch et al. 2019) (Cross-Chapter Box 11 in this chapter).
Innovation and climate mitigation policies can also have negative 
socio-economic impacts, and not all countries, actors and regions 
around the world benefit equally from rapid technological change 
(Deng et al. 2018; McCauley and Heffron 2018; Eisenberg 2019; 
UNCTAD 2019; Henry et al. 2020). In fact, socio-technical transitions 
often create winners and losers (Roberts et al. 2018). Technological 
change can reinforce existing divides between women and men, rural 
and urban populations, and rich and poor communities: older workers 
displaced by technological change will not qualify for jobs if they 
were unable to acquire new skills; weak educational systems may not 
prepare young people for emerging employment opportunities; and 
disadvantaged social groups, including women in many countries, 
often have fewer opportunities for formal education (McCauley and 
Heffron 2018; UNCTAD 2019). That is a risk regarding technological 
change for climate change mitigation, as emerging evidence 
suggests that the energy transition can create jobs and productivity 
opportunities in the renewable energy sector, but will also lead to 
job losses in fossil fuel and exposed sectors (Le Treut et al. 2021). At 
the same time, these new jobs may use more intensively high-level 
cognitive and interpersonal skills compared to regular, traditional 
jobs, requiring higher levels of human capital dimensions such as 
formal education, work experience and on-the-job training (Consoli 
et al. 2016). Despite the empowerment potentials of decentralised 
energy systems, not all societal groups are equally positioned to 
benefit from energy community policies, with issues of energy 
justice taking place within initiatives, between initiatives and related 
actors, as well as beyond initiatives (Calzadilla and Mauger 2018; 
van Bommel and Höffken 2021).
The opportunities and challenges of technological change can 
also differ within country regions and between countries (Garcia-
Casals et al. 2019). Within countries, Vasconcellos and Caiado 
Couto (2021) show that, in the absence of policies and capacity-
building activities which promote local recruiting, a significant part 
of total benefits of wind projects, especially high-income jobs and 
high value-added activities, is captured by already higher-income 
regions. Between countries, developing countries usually have lower 
innovation capabilities, which means they need to import low-
emission technology from abroad and are also less able to adapt 
these technologies to local conditions and create new markets and 
business models. This can lead to external dependencies and limit 
opportunities to leverage economic benefits from technology transfer 
(Section 16.5.1).
This means that, in countries below the technological frontier, the 
contribution of technological change to climate change mitigation 
can happen primarily through the adoption and less through the 
development of new technologies, which can reduce potential 
economic and welfare benefits from rapid technological change 
(UNCTAD 2019). The adoption of consumer information and 
communication technology (ICT) (Baller et al. 2016) or renewable 
energy technology (Lema et al. 2021) cannot bring least-developed 
economies close to the technological frontier without appropriate 
technological capabilities in other sectors, and an enabling innovation 
system (Ockwell and Mallett 2012; Sagar and Majumdar 2014; 
Ockwell et al. 2018; UNCTAD 2019; Malhotra et al. 2021; Vasconcellos 
and Caiado Couto 2021). It has been argued widely that both hard 
and soft infrastructure, as well as appropriate policy frameworks 
and capability building, would facilitate developing countries’ 
engagement in long-term technological innovation and sustainable 
industrial development, and eventually in achieving the SDGs 
(Ockwell and Byrne 2016; Altenburg and Rodrik 2017; UNCTAD 2019).
16.6.2.2 Challenges to Governing Innovation for 
Sustainable Development
Dominant economic systems and centralised governance structures 
continue to reproduce unsustainable patterns of production and 
consumption, reinforcing many economic and governance structures 
from local through national and global scales (Johnstone and Newell 
2018). Technological change, as an inherently complex process 
(Funtowicz 2020), poses governance challenges (Bukkens et al. 2020) 
requiring social innovation (Repo and Matschoss 2019) (Section 5.6 
and Chapter 13).
Prospects for effectively governing SDG-oriented technological 
transformations require, at a minimum, balanced views and new tools 
for securing the scientific legitimacy and credibility to connect public 
policy and technological change in society (Jasanoff 2018; Sadras 
2020). Many frameworks of governance have been proposed, such 
as reflexive governance (Voss et al. 2006), polycentric governance 
(Ostrom 2010), collaborative governance (Bodin 2017), adaptive 
governance (Munene et al. 2018) and transformative governance 
(Rijke et al. 2013; Westley et al. 2013) (Chapters 13 and 14).
A particular class of barriers to the development and adoption of new 
technologies comprises entrenched power relations dominated by 
vested interests that control and benefit from existing technologies 
(Chaffin et al. 2016; Dorband et al. 2020). Such interests can generate 
balancing feedbacks within multilevel social-technological regimes 
that are related to technological lock-in, including allocations of 
investment between fossil and renewable energy technologies 
(Unruh 2002; Sagar et al. 2009; Seto et al. 2016).
Weaker coordination and implementation capacity in some developing 
countries can undermine the ability to avoid trade-offs with other 
development objectives – such as reinforced inequalities or excessive 
indebtedness and increased external dependency  – and can limit 
the potential of leveraging economic benefits from technologies 
transferred from abroad (Section  16.5 and Cross-Chapter Box  12 
in this chapter). Van Welie and Romijn (2018) show that, in a low-
income setting, the exclusion of some local stakeholders from the 
decision-making process may undermine sustainability transitions 
efforts. Countries with high levels of inequality can be more prone 
to elite capture, non-transparent political decision-making processes, relations based on clientelism and patronage, and no independent 
judiciary (Jasanoff 2018), although in particular contexts, non-elites 
manage to exert influence (Moldalieva and Heathershaw 2020). 
The dominance of incumbents, however, implies that sustainable 
technological transitions could be achieved without yielding any 
social and democratic benefits (Hansen et al. 2018). In the cultural 
domain, a  recurrent policy challenge that has been observed in 
most countries is the limited public support for development and 
deployment of low-carbon technologies (Bernauer and McGrath 
2016). The conventional approach to mobilising such support has 
been to portray technological change as a  means of minimising 
climate change. Empirical studies show that simply reframing climate 
policy is highly unlikely to build and sustain public support (Bernauer 
and McGrath 2016).
Finally, there is a link between social and technological innovation; any 
innovation is grounded in complex socio-economic arrangements, to 
which governance arrangements would need to respond (Sections 5.5 
and 5.6, Chapter 13, and Cross-Chapter Box 12 in this chapter). Social 
innovation can contribute to maximising synergies and minimising 
trade-offs in relation to technological and other innovative practices, 
but for this to materialise, national, regional and local circumstances 
need to be taken into account and, if needed, changed. Even in 
circumstances of high capabilities, the extent that social innovation 
might help to promote synergies and avoid trade-offs is not easy to 
evaluate (Grimm et al. 2013).
16.6.3 Actions that Maximise Synergies and 
Minimise Trade-offs Between Innovation 
and Sustainable Development
Technological innovation may bring significant synergy in pursuing 
SDGs, but it may also create challenges to the economy, human 
well-being, and the environment (Schillo and Robinson 2017; 
Thacker et al. 2019; Walsh et al. 2020). The degree of potential 
synergies and trade-offs among SDGs differs from country to country 
and over time (Section  16.6.1.1). These potentials will depend on 
available resources, geographical conditions, development stage 
and policy measures. Even though synergies and trade-offs related 
to technological innovation have received the least attention from 
researchers (Deng et al. 2018), literature show that higher synergy 
was found where countries’ policies take into account the linkages 
between sectors (Mainali et al. 2018). For technology innovation to be 
effective in enhancing synergies and reducing trade-offs, its role and 
nature in production and consumption patterns, as well as in value 
chains and in the wider economy, requires clarification. Technology 
ownership and control together with its current orientation and 
focus towards productivity, needs to be revised if a  meaningful 
contribution to the implementation of the SDGs is to be achieved 
in a transformative way (Walsh et al. 2020). Responsible innovation, 
combining anticipation, reflexivity, inclusion and responsiveness, has 
been suggested as a framework for conducting innovation (Stilgoe 
et al. 2013). Also inclusive innovation (Hoffecker 2021) could make 
sure that unheard voices and interests are included in decision-
making, and that methods for this have been implemented in practice 
(Douthwaite and Hoffecker 2017).
There are several examples of how to maximise synergies and avoid 
or minimise trade-offs when bringing technological innovation to the 
ground. When implementing off-grid solar energy in Rwanda, synergies 
were found between 80 of the 169 SDG targets, demonstrating 
how mainstreaming off-grid policies and prioritising investment in 
the off-grid sector can realise human development and well-being, 
build physical and social infrastructures, and achieve sustainable 
management of environmental resources (Bisaga et al. 2021). Another 
example is related to wind power in Northeast of Brazil where the 
creation of direct and indirect jobs has been demonstrated in areas 
where capabilities are high, as well as associated improvements 
in wholesale and retail trade and real estate activities, though this 
also emphasises the need for capacity development along with 
international collaboration projects (Vasconcellos and Caiado 
Couto 2021). Other examples include studies raising awareness on 
solar energy and women’s empowerment (Winther et al. 2018) and 
recycling and waste (Cross and Murray 2018).
Other actions with the potential to maximise synergies are those 
related to community or grassroots technological innovation. The importance of the link between technological innovation and 
community action and its contribution to sustainable development 
is usually underestimated. Further research is needed on this and, 
most importantly, its inclusion in the political agenda on sustainable 
development (Seyfang and Smith 2007). On the other hand, when 
technological innovation occurs far from where is implemented and 
participation in the production, and hence training activities of local 
actors is minimal, co-benefits and synergies among SDGs are limited 
and usually far below expectations (Bhamidipati and Hansen 2021; 
Vasconcellos and Caiado Couto 2021). Actions by policymakers that 
safeguard environmental and social aspects can boost synergies 
and maximise those co-benefits (Lema et al. 2021). Given that 
technological change impacts countries, regions and social groups 
differently, transition policies can be designed to ensure that all 
regions and communities are able to take advantage of the energy 
and other transitions (McCauley and Heffron 2018; Henry et al. 2020).
Box  16.10 provides insights on how a  systemic approach to 
technological innovation can contribute to reconcile synergies and 
trade-offs to achieve sustainable development and mitigation goals.
Box 16.10 | Agroecological Approaches: The Role of Local and Indigenous Knowledge 
and Innovation
Major improvements in agricultural productivity have been recorded over recent decades (FAO 2018a). However, progress has also 
come with social and environmental costs, high levels of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and rising demand for natural resources 
(UNEP 2013; UNEP 2017; FAO 2018a; Bringezu 2019; Díaz et al. 2019).
Trend analysis indicates that a large share of the global demand for land is projected to be supplied by South America, in particular the 
Amazon (Lambin and Meyfroidt 2011; TEEB 2018) and Gran Chaco forests (Grau et al. 2015). In developing countries, land use change 
for satisfying international meat demand is leading to deforestation. In Brazil, the amount of GHGs emitted by the beef cattle sector 
alone represents 65% of the agricultural sector’s emissions and 15% of the country’s overall emissions (May 2019).
Agricultural and food systems are complex and diverse; they include traditional food systems, mixed food systems and modern food 
systems (Pengue et al. 2018). Multiple forms of visible and invisible flows of natural resources exist in global food systems (Pascual 
et al. 2017; TEEB 2018; IPBES 2019).
Technological practices, management and changes in the food chain could help adapt to climate change, reduce emissions and absorb 
carbon in soil, thus contributing to carbon dioxide removal (IPCC, 2018, 2019). A range of technologies can be implemented – from 
highly technological options, such as transgenic crops resistant to drought (González et al. 2019), salt or pesticides (OECD 2011b; 
Kim and Kwak 2020) or smart and 4.0 agriculture (Klerkx et al. 2019), to more frugal, low-cost technologies such as agroecological 
approaches adapted to local circumstances (Francis et al. 2003; FAO 2018b). These agroecological approaches are the subject of this box.
For developing countries, agroecological approaches could tackle climate change challenges and food security (WGII-report, Chapter 5, 
Box 5.10). Small Island Developing States (SIDS) support livelihoods to develop local food value chains that can promote sustainable 
management of natural resources, preserve biodiversity and help build resilience to climate change impacts and natural disasters 
(FAO 2019). Other advantages of agroecological practices include their adaptation to different social, economic and ecological 
environments (Altieri and Nicholls 2017), the fact that they are physical and financial capital-extensive, and are well-integrated 
with the social and cultural capital of rural territories and local resources (knowledge, natural resources, etc.), without leading to 
technological dependencies (Côte et al. 2019).
Agroecology is a dynamic concept that has gained prominence in scientific, agricultural and political discourses in recent years (Wezel 
et al. 2020; Anderson et al. 2021) (Chapter 7, Chapter 5, WGII Box 5.10). Three of the different agroecological approaches are briefly 
discussed here: agroecological intensification; agroforestry; and biochar use in rice paddy fields.
Agricultural intensification provides ways to use land, water and energy resources to ensure adequate food supply while also 
addressing concerns about climate change and biodiversity (Cassman and Grassini 2020). The term ecological intensification 
(Tittonell 2014) focuses on biological and ecological processes and functions in agroecosystems. In line with the development of the 
concept of agroecology, agroecological intensification integrates social and cultural perspectives (Wezel et al. 2015). Agroecological 
intensification (Mockshell and Villarino 2019) for sub-Saharan Africa aims to address employment and food security challenges (Pretty 
et al. 2011; Altieri et al. 2015).
Another example of an agroecological approach is agroforestry. Agroforestry provides examples of positive agroecological feedbacks, 
such as ‘the regreening of the Sahel’ in Niger. The practice is based on the assisted natural regeneration of trees in cultivated fields, an 
old method that was slowly dying out, but which innovative public policies (the transfer of property rights over trees from the state to 
farmers) helped restore (Sendzimir et al. 2011).
Rice paddy fields are a major source of methane. Climate change impacts and adaptation strategies can affect rice production and 
rice farmers’ net income. Biochar use in rice paddy fields has been advocated as a potential strategy to reduce GHG emissions from 
soils, enhance soil carbon stocks and nitrogen retention, and improve soil function and crop productivity (Mohammadi et al. 2020).
The contributions of indigenous people (Díaz et al. 2019), heritage agriculture (Koohafkan and Altieri 2010) and peasants’ agroecological 
knowledge (Holt-Giménez 2002) to technological innovation offer a wide array of options for management of land, soils, biodiversity 
and enhanced food security without depending on modern, foreign agricultural technologies (Denevan 1995). In farming agriculture 
and food systems, innovation and technology based on nature could help to reduce climate change impacts (Griscom et al. 2017). 
Evidence suggests that there are benefits to integrating tradition with new technologies in order to design new approaches to 
farming, and that these are greatest when they are tailored to local circumstances (Nicholls and Altieri 2018).Box 16.10 (continued)
16.6.4 Climate Change, Sustainable 
Development and Innovation
This section gives a  synthesis of this chapter on innovation 
and technology development and transfer, connecting it to 
sustainable development.
In conjunction with other enabling conditions, technological 
innovation can support system transitions to limit warming, help 
shift development pathways, and bring about new and improved 
ways of delivering goods and services that are essential to human 
well-being (high confidence). At the same time, however, innovation 
can result in trade-offs that undermine progress on mitigation 
and towards other SDGs. Trade-offs include negative externalities, 
such as environmental impacts and social inequalities, rebound 
effects leading to lower net emission reductions or even increases 
in emissions, and increased dependency on foreign knowledge and 
providers (high confidence). Digitalisation, for example, holds both 
opportunity for emission reduction and emission-saving behaviour 
change, but at the same time causes significant environmental, social 
and greenhouse gas (GHG) impacts (high confidence).
A systemic view of innovation that takes into account the roles 
of actors, institutions, and their interactions, can contribute to 
enhanced understanding of processes and outcomes of technological 
innovation, and to interventions and arrangements that can help 
innovation. It can also play a  role in clarifying the synergies and 
trade-offs between technological innovation and the SDGs. Effective 
governance and policy, implemented in an inclusive, responsible and holistic way, could make innovation policy more effective, and avoid 
and minimise misalignments between climate change mitigation, 
technological innovation, and other societal goals (medium evidence, 
high agreement).
A special feature is the dynamics of transitions. Like other enabling 
conditions, technological innovation plays a  balancing role  – by 
inhibiting change as innovation strengthens incumbent technologies 
and practices – and a reinforcing role, by allowing new technologies 
and practices to disrupt the existing socio-technical regimes (high 
confidence). Appropriate innovation policies can help to better 
organise innovation systems, while other policies (technology push 
and demand pull) can provide suitable resources and incentives to 
support and guide these innovation systems towards societally-
desirable outcomes, ensure the innovations are deployed at scale, 
and direct these dynamics towards system transitions for climate 
change mitigation, and also towards addressing other SDGs. This 
means taking into account the full lifecycle or value chain as well as 
analysis of synergies and trade-offs.
Against this backdrop, international cooperation on technological 
innovation is one of the enablers of climate action in developing 
countries on both mitigation and adaptation (high confidence). 
Experiences with international cooperation on technology 
development and deployment suggest that such activities are most 
effective when they: are approached as ‘innovation cooperation’ that 
engenders a holistic, systemic view of innovation requirements; are 
an equitable partnership between donors and recipients; and develop 
local innovation capabilities (medium evidence, high agreement).
Chapter  17, in particular Section  17.4, connects technological 
innovation with other enabling conditions, such as behaviour, 
institutional capacity and multilevel governance, to clarify the actions 
that could be taken, holistically and in conjunction, to strengthen and 
accelerate the system transitions required to limit warming to be in 
line with the Paris Agreement and to place countries in sustainable 
development pathways.
16.7 Knowledge Gaps
Filling gaps in literature availability, data collection, modelling, 
application of frameworks and further analysis in several sectors 
will improve knowledge on innovation and technology development 
and transfer, including research and development (R&D) to support 
policymaking in climate change mitigation as well as adaptation. 
These policies and related interventions need to benefit from data 
and methodologies for the ex post evaluation of their effectiveness.
This section addresses identified knowledge gaps related to: 
what extent developing countries are represented in studies on 
innovation and technology development and transfer; national 
contexts and local innovation capacity; potential and actual 
contributions of businesses; literature emphasis on mitigation; 
indicators to assess innovation systems; non-technical barriers for 
the feasibility of decarbonisation pathways; the role of domestic 
intellectual property rights (IPR) policy; digitalisation in low-
emissions pathways; and Paris Agreement compliance regarding 
technology and capacity building.
Representation of developing countries
One of knowledge gaps identified when assessing the literature 
is on the representation of developing countries in studies on 
innovation and technology development and transfer. This includes 
the conceptual core disciplines of the economics of innovation, 
innovation systems and sustainability transitions. This is true for 
studies on developing countries, and for authors originating from, or 
active in, developing country contexts. The evidence of the impact of 
decarbonisation policy instruments applied to developing countries 
or Small Island Developing States (SIDS) is limited. Expanding the 
knowledge base with studies that focus on developing countries 
would not only allow for testing whether the theories (developed 
by predominantly by developed-country researchers for industrialised 
countries) hold in developing country contexts, but also yield policy 
insights that could help both domestic and international policymakers 
working on climate-related technology cooperation.
National contexts and local innovation capacity
While a  growing body of literature has shown how technology 
characteristics and complexity, national context and innovation 
capacity can influence the capacity of a  country’s innovation 
ecosystem as a  result of incentive and attraction policies, more 
research is needed to help prioritise and design policies in different national contexts. Important knowledge gaps need to be filled 
regarding the impact of ‘green’ public procurement, lending, ‘green’ 
public banking, and building code policies on innovation outcomes.
There is also a superficial understanding of the potential and actual 
contributions of businesses, educational institutions and socially 
responsible programmes, particularly in developing countries, as 
sources of innovation and early adopters of new technologies, and 
a notable lack of knowledge about indigenous practices.
Emphasis on mitigation
Current literature has a strong bias to studies originating from and 
based on developed countries. Also, innovation and technology 
literature is skewed to mitigation and, specifically, energy. Literature 
on technology innovation for adaptation is largely missing.
In the area of innovation studies, data are limited on the different 
indicators used to assess the strength of the innovation system, (even 
for energy), including global figures on R&D and demonstration 
spending, also for developing countries, and their effectiveness. There 
is also a lack of a comprehensive framework and detailed data to 
assess the strengths of low-emission innovation systems, including 
interactions among actors, innovation policy implementation, and 
strength of institutions.
Indicators to assess innovation systems
Another gap in knowledge remains between the results from energy-
climate-economy models and those emerging from systems and 
sustainability transition approaches, empirical case studies, and the 
innovation system literature. If this gap is filled, understanding 
could be improved of the feasibility of decarbonisation pathways in 
light of the many non-technical barriers to technology deployment 
and diffusion.
Non-technical barriers for the feasibility 
of decarbonisation pathways
In the field of policy instruments, existing evaluations provide 
insufficient evidence to assess the impact of decarbonisation policy 
instruments on innovation, as these evaluations mainly focus on 
environmental or technological effects.
Domestic IPR policy
The potential positive or negative role of domestic IPR policy in 
technology transfer to least-developed countries remains unclear as 
the literature does not show agreement. Moreover, gaps remain in 
impact evaluations of sub-national green industrial policies, which 
are of growing importance. The interaction between subnational and 
national decarbonisation policies to advance innovation would also 
benefit from further research, particularly in developing countries.
Digitalisation in low-emissions pathways 
and digitalisation
The understanding of the role of digitalisation in decarbonisation 
pathways is lacking and needs to be studied from several angles. 
Existing studies do not sufficiently take into account knowledge on 
the energy impact of digital technologies, in particular the increase 
in energy demand by digital devices, and the increase in energy 
efficiency. Studies would benefit from being technology/sector/
country-specific.
Further exploration is needed into the way digitalisation influences 
the framework conditions that cause decarbonisation, the socio-
economic and behavioural barriers influencing the diffusion of 
technologies in the long-term scenarios, and the relationship with 
society and its effects.
Given the implications of the digital revolution for sustainability, 
a  better characterisation of governance aspects would increase 
understanding of the implications for policymakers of digitalisation 
and the possibilities for it and other general-purpose technologies.
Research (theoretical and empirical) on the impacts of imitation, or 
adaptation of new technological solutions invented in one region 
and used in other regions, could fill knowledge gaps and accelerate 
diffusion of climate-related technologies, while taking care not to 
reduce the incentive for inventors to search for new solutions.
Paris Agreement compliance
An independent assessment is underway to look at the compliance 
of the Paris Agreement with regard to technology and capacity 
building as means of implementation. The Enhanced Transparency 
Framework for action and support is developing a methodology for 
monitoring, reporting and verification. There is a lack of analysis of 
the full landscape of international cooperation, of the effectiveness 
of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and 
the Paris Agreement, and what is needed to meet their objectives.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) 
FAQ 16.1 |   Will innovation and technological changes be enough to meet the Paris 
Agreement objectives?
The Paris Agreement stressed the importance of development and transfer of technologies to improve resilience to climate change 
and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, innovation and even fast technological change will not be enough to achieve 
Paris Agreement mitigation objectives. Other changes are necessary across the production and consumption system and the society 
in general, including behavioural changes.
Technological changes never happen in a vacuum; they are always accompanied by, for instance, people changing habits, companies 
changing value chains, or banks changing risk profiles. Therefore, technological changes driven by holistic approaches can contribute 
to accelerate and spread those changes towards the achievement of climate and sustainable development goals.
In innovation studies, such systemic approaches are said to strengthen the functions of technological or national innovation systems, 
so that climate-friendly technologies can flourish. Innovation policies can help respond to local priorities and prevent unintended 
and undesirable consequences of technological change, such as unequal access to new technologies across countries and between 
income groups, environmental degradation and negative effects on employment.
FAQ 16.2 |   What can be done to promote innovation for climate change and the widespread 
diffusion of low-emission and climate-resilient technology?
The speed and success of innovation processes could be enhanced with the involvement of a  wider range of actors from the 
industry, research and financial communities working in partnerships at national, regional and international levels. Public policies 
play a critical role to bring together these different actors and create the necessary enabling conditions, including financial support, 
through different instruments as well as institutional and human capacities.
The increasing complexity of technologies requires cooperation if their widespread diffusion is to be achieved. Cooperation includes 
the necessary knowledge flow within and between countries and regions. This knowledge flow can take the form of exchanging 
experiences, ideas, skills, and practices, among others.
FAQ 16.3 |   What is the role of international technology cooperation in addressing 
climate change?
Technologies that are currently known but not yet widely used need to be spread around the world, and adapted to local preferences 
and conditions. Innovation capabilities are required not only to adapt new technologies for local use, but also to create new markets 
and business models. International technology cooperation can serve that purpose.
In fact, evidence shows that international cooperation on technology development and transfer can help developing countries to 
achieve their climate goals more effectively and, if this is done properly, can also help to addressing other sustainable development 
goals. Many initiatives exist both regionally and globally to help countries in achieving technology development and transfer 
through partnerships and research collaboration that include developed and developing countries, with a key role for technological 
institutions and universities. Enhancing current activities would help an effective, long-term global response to climate change, 
while promoting sustainable development.
Globalisation of production and supply of goods and services, including innovation and new technologies, may open up opportunities 
for developing countries to advance technology diffusion; however, so far not all countries have benefitted from the globalisation 
of innovation due to different barriers, such as access to finance and technical capabilities. These asymmetries between countries in 
the globalisation process can also lead to dependencies on foreign knowledge and providers.
Not all technology cooperation directly results in mitigation outcomes. Overall, technology transfer broadly has focused on enhancing 
climate technology absorption and deployment in developing countries as well as research, development and demonstration, and 
knowledge spillovers.
The Paris Agreement also reflects this view by noting that countries shall strengthen cooperative action on technology development 
and transfer regarding two main aspects: (i) promoting collaborative approaches to research and development; and (ii) facilitating 
access to technology to developing country Parties.