
Chapter 10 Transport10Executive Summary
Meeting climate mitigation goals would require transformative 
changes in the transport sector (high confidence).  In 2019, 
direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the transport sector 
were 8.7 GtCO 2-eq (up from 5.0 GtCO 2-eq in 1990) and accounted 
for 23% of global energy-related CO 2 emissions. 70% of direct 
transport emissions came from road vehicles, while 1%, 11%, and 
12% came from rail, shipping, and aviation, respectively. Emissions 
from shipping and aviation continue to grow rapidly. Transport-
related emissions in developing regions of the world have increased 
more rapidly than in Europe or North America, a trend that is likely 
to continue in coming decades (high confidence). {10.1, 10.5, 10.6}
Since the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) there has been 
a growing awareness of the need for demand management 
solutions combined with new technologies, such as the 
rapidly growing use of electromobility for land transport and 
the emerging options in advanced biofuels and hydrogen-
based fuels for shipping and aviation.  There is a  growing 
need for systemic infrastructure changes that enable behavioural 
modifications and reductions in demand for transport services that 
can in turn reduce energy demand. The response to the COVID-19 
pandemic has also shown that behavioural interventions can reduce 
transport-related GHG emissions. For example, COVID-19-based 
lockdowns have confirmed the transformative value of telecommuting 
replacing significant numbers of work and personal journeys as well 
as promoting local active transport. There are growing opportunities 
to implement strategies that drive behavioural change and support 
the adoption of new transport technology options. {Chapter 5, 10.2, 
10.3, 10.4, 10.8}
Changes in urban form, behaviour programmes, the circular 
economy, the shared economy, and digitalisation trends 
can support systemic changes that lead to reductions in 
demand for transport services or expand the use of more 
efficient transport modes (high confidence).  Cities can reduce 
their transport-related fuel consumption by around 25% through 
combinations of more compact land use and the provision of less 
car-dependent transport infrastructure. Appropriate infrastructure, 
including protected pedestrian and bike pathways, can also support 
much greater localised active travel.1 Transport demand management 
incentives are expected to be necessary to support these systemic 
changes (high confidence). There is mixed evidence of the effect 
of circular economy initiatives, shared economy initiatives, and 
digitalisation on demand for transport services. For example, while 
dematerialisation can reduce the amount of material that needs 
to be transported to manufacturing facilities, an increase in online 
shopping with priority delivery can increase demand for freight 
transport. Similarly, while teleworking could reduce travel demand, 
increased ridesharing could increase vehicle-km travelled. {Chapter 1, 
Chapter 5, 10.2, 10.8}

gas emissions than internal combustion engine vehicles 
(ICEVs) when BEVs are charged with low-carbon electricity 
(high confidence). Electromobility is being rapidly implemented in 
micromobility (e-autorickshaws, e-scooters, e-bikes), in transit systems, 
especially buses, and, to a lesser degree, in the electrification of personal 
vehicles. BEVs could also have the added benefit of supporting grid 
operations. The commercial availability of mature lithium-ion batteries 
(LIBs) has underpinned this growth in electromobility.
As global battery production increases, unit costs are declining. Further 
efforts to reduce the GHG footprint of battery production, however, 
are essential for maximising the mitigation potential of BEVs. The 
continued growth of electromobility for land transport would require 
investments in electric charging and related grid infrastructure (high 
confidence). Electromobility powered by low-carbon electricity has 
the potential to rapidly reduce transport GHG and can be applied 
with multiple co-benefits in the developing world’s growing cities 
(high confidence). {10.3, 10.4, 10.8}
Land-based, long-range, heavy-duty trucks can be decarbonised 
through battery electric haulage (including the use of electric 
road systems), complemented by hydrogen- and biofuel-
based fuels in some contexts (medium confidence). These 
same technologies and expanded use of available electric rail 
systems can support rail decarbonisation (medium confidence). 
Initial deployments of battery electric, hydrogen- and bio-based 
haulage are underway, and commercial operations of some of these 
technologies are considered feasible by 2030 (medium confidence). 
These technologies nevertheless face challenges regarding driving 
range, capital and operating costs, and infrastructure availability. In 
particular, fuel cell durability, high energy consumption, and costs 
continue to challenge the commercialisation of hydrogen-based fuel 
cell vehicles. Increased capacity for low-carbon hydrogen production 
would also be essential for hydrogen-based fuels to serve as an 
emissions reduction strategy (high confidence). {10.3, 10.4, 10.8}
Decarbonisation options for shipping and aviation still require 
R&D, though advanced biofuels, ammonia, and synthetic fuels 
are emerging as viable options (medium confidence).  Increased 
efficiency has been insufficient to limit the emissions from shipping 
and aviation, and natural gas-based fuels are likely inadequate 
to meet stringent decarbonisation goals for these segments (high 
confidence). High energy density, low-carbon fuels are required, but 
they have not yet reached commercial scale. Advanced biofuels could 
provide low-carbon jet fuel (medium confidence). The production of 
synthetic fuels using low-carbon hydrogen with CO 2 captured through 
direct air capture (DAC) or bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 
(BECCS) could provide jet and marine fuels but these options still 
require demonstration at scale (low confidence). Ammonia produced 
with low-carbon hydrogen could also serve as a marine fuel (medium 
confidence). Deployment of these fuels requires reductions in 
production costs. {10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.8}
Transport  Chapter 1010
Scenarios from bottom-up and top-down models indicate that 
without intervention, CO 2 emissions from transport could grow 
in the range of 16% and 50% by 2050 (medium confidence). The 
scenarios literature projects continued growth in demand for freight 
and passenger services, particularly in developing countries in Africa 
and Asia (high confidence). This growth is projected to take place 
across all transport modes. Increases in demand notwithstanding, 
scenarios that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot 
suggest that a  59% reduction (42–68% interquartile range) in 
transport-related CO 2 emissions by 2050, compared to modelled 

reliance on emissions reduction in sectors other than transport, 
a  quarter of the 1.5°C degree scenarios describe transport-related 
CO2 emissions reductions in excess of 68% (relative to modelled 

1.5 renewables (REN) and 1.5 low demand (LD) describe emission 
reductions of 80% and 90% in the transport sector, respectively, 
by 2050. Transport-related emission reductions, however, may not 
happen uniformly across regions. For example, transport emissions 
from the Developed Countries and Eastern European and West-
Central Asian countries decrease from 2020 levels by 2050 across 
all scenarios compatible with a 1.5°C goal (C1–C2 group), but could 
increase in Africa, Asia and Pacific, Latin America and Caribbean, and 
the Middle East in some of these scenarios.2 {10.7}
The scenarios literature indicates that fuel and technology shifts are 
crucial to reducing carbon emissions to meet temperature goals. 
In general terms, electrification tends to play the key role in land-
based transport, but biofuels and hydrogen (and derivatives) could 
play a  role in decarbonisation of freight in some contexts (high 
confidence). Biofuels and hydrogen (and derivatives) are likely more 
prominent in shipping and aviation (high confidence). The shifts 
towards these alternative fuels must occur alongside shifts towards 
clean technologies in other sectors (high confidence). {10.7}
There is a  growing awareness of the need to plan for the 
significant expansion of low-carbon energy infrastructure, 
including low-carbon power generation and hydrogen 
production, to support emissions reductions in the transport 
sector (high confidence). Integrated energy planning and 
operations that take into account energy demand and system 
constraints across all sectors (transport, buildings, and industry) offer 
the opportunity to leverage sectoral synergies and avoid inefficient 
allocation of energy resources. Integrated planning of transport 
and power infrastructure would be particularly useful in developing 
countries where ‘greenfield’ development doesn’t suffer from 
constraints imposed by legacy systems. {10.3, 10.4, 10.8}
The deployment of low-carbon aviation and shipping fuels 
that support decarbonisation of the transport sector could 
require changes to national and international governance 
structures (medium confidence).  Currently, the Paris Agreement 
does not specifically cover emissions from international shipping 
and aviation. Instead, accounting for emissions from international 
transport in the Nationally Determined Contributions is at the 

Organization (ICAO) and International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
have established emissions reductions targets, only strategies to 
improve fuel efficiency and reduce demand have been pursued, and 
there has been minimal commitment to new technologies. Some 
authors in the literature have argued that including international 
shipping and aviation under the Paris Agreement could spur stronger 
decarbonisation efforts in these segments. {10.5, 10.6, 10.7}
There are growing concerns about resource availability, labour 
rights, non-climate environmental impacts, and costs of critical 
minerals needed for LIBs (medium confidence).  Emerging 
national strategies on critical minerals and the requirements from 
major vehicle manufacturers are leading to new, more geographically 
diverse mines. The standardisation of battery modules and packaging 
within and across vehicle platforms, as well as increased focus on 
design for recyclability, are important. Given the high degree of 
potential recyclability of LIBs, a  nearly closed-loop system in the 
future could mitigate concerns about critical mineral issues (medium 
confidence). {10.3, 10.8}
Legislated climate strategies are emerging at all levels 
of government and, together with pledges for personal 
choices, could spur the deployment of demand- and supply-
side transport mitigation strategies (medium confidence). 
At the local level, legislation can support local transport plans 
that include commitments or pledges from local institutions to 
encourage behaviour change by adopting an organisational culture 
that motivates sustainable behaviour, with inputs from the creative 
arts. Such institution-led mechanisms could include bike-to-work 
campaigns, free transport passes, parking charges, or eliminating car 
benefits. Community-based solutions like solar sharing, community 
charging, and mobility as a service can generate new opportunities to 
facilitate low-carbon transport futures. At the regional and national 
levels, legislation can include vehicle and fuel efficiency standards, 
R&D support, and large-scale investments in low-carbon transport 
infrastructure. {10.8, Chapter 15}
Chapter 10 Transport1010.1 Introduction and Overview
This chapter examines the transport sector’s role in climate change 
mitigation. It appraises the transport system’s interactions beyond the 
technology of vehicles and fuels to include the full lifecycle analysis 
of mitigation options, a  review of enabling conditions, and metrics 
that can facilitate advancing transport decarbonisation goals. The 
chapter assesses developments in the systems of land-based transport 
and introduces, as a  new feature since AR5, two separate sections 
focusing on the trends and challenges in aviation and shipping. The  chapter assesses the future trajectories emerging from global, 
energy, and national scenarios and concludes with a discussion on 
enabling conditions for transformative change in the sector.
This section (Section 10.1) discusses how transport relates to virtually 
all the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the trends and drivers 
making transport a big contributor to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
the impacts climate change is having on transport that can be 
addressed as part of mitigation, and the overview of emerging transport 
disruptions with potential to shape a low-carbon transport pathway.
Table 10.1 | Transport and the Sustainable Development Goals: Synergies and trade-offs.
Sustainable Development Goals: Synergies and trade-offs
Basic human needs Earth preconditions Sustainable resource useSocial and economic 
developmentUniversal valuesTransport-related topics (low-carbon transport; active transport; electric vehicles)
Advances in vehicle technology; Improved public transport system –Lower air pollution 
contributes to positive 
health outcomes.
 –Energy access can contribute 
to poverty alleviation.
 –Transport planning is 
a major player in reducing 
poverty in cities.
 –Access to healthcare.
 –Diseases from air pollution.
 –Injuries and deaths from 
traffic accidents.
 –Reduced driving-induced 
stress.
 –Links between active 
transport and good health 
with positive effects of 
walking and cycling.
 –Improving road accessibility 
to disabled users.
 –Reduce time spent on 
transport/mobility. –Reduction of GHG emissions 
along the entire value chain, 
e.g., Well-to-Wheel.
 –Further development 
addressing minor GHG 
emissions and pollutants.
 –Transport oriented to 
sustainable development.
 –Circular economy principle 
applied to transport. –Share of renewable 
energy use.
 –Energy efficiency of vehicles.
 –Clean and affordable energy 
off-grid.
 –Reduce material consumption 
during production, lifecycle 
analysis of vehicles and their 
operations including entire 
value chains.
 –Closed loop carbon and 
nutrient cycle linked to 
circular economy. –Role of transport for economic 
and human development.
 –Decarbonised public 
transport rather than 
private vehicle use.
 –Transport oriented to 
sustainable development.
 –Sustainable transport 
infrastructure and systems 
for cities and rural areas.
 –Affordability of mobility 
services, this can also be 
covered under ‘universal 
access’ to public transport.
 –Accessibility vs mobility: 
mobility to opportunities; 
transport equity; development 
as freedom.
 –Positive economic growth 
(employment) outcomes due 
to resource efficiency and 
lower productive energy cost.
 –Role of transport provision 
in accessing work, 
reconfiguration of social 
norms, as working from home.
 –Transport manufacturers 
as key employers changing 
role of transport-related 
labour due to platform 
economy, and innovations 
in autonomous vehicles. –Gender equality in transport.
 –Reduced inequalities.
 –Enables access to 
quality education.
 –Partnership for the goals.ReferencesGrant et al. 2016; Haines 
et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2018; 
Nieuwenhuijsen 2018; Smith 
et al. 2018; Sofiev et al. 2018; 
Peden and Puvanachandra 
2019; King and Krizek 2020; 
Macmillan et al. 2020Farzaneh et al. 2019; see 
particularly following chapters.SLoCaT 2019; see particularly 
following chapters.Bruun and Givoni 2015; Pojani 
and Stead 2015; Hensher 2017; 
ATAG 2018; Grzelakowski 
2018; Weiss et al. 2018; Brussel 
et al. 2019; Gota et al. 2019; 
Mohammadi et al. 2019; Peden 
and Puvanachandra 2019; 
SLoCaT 2019; Xu et al. 2019Hernandez 2018; Prati 2018; 
Levin and Faith-Ell 2019; 
Vecchio et al. 2020
Transport  Chapter 1010
10.1.1 Transport and the Sustainable 
Development Goals
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by the 
United Nations (UN) has renewed international efforts to pursue and 
accurately measure global actions towards sustainable development 
(United Nations 2015). The 17 SDGs set out the overall goals that 
are further specified by 169 targets and 232 SDG indicators, many of 
which relate to transport (United Nations 2017; Lisowski et al. 2020). 
A sustainable transport system provides safe, inclusive, affordable, 
and clean passenger and freight mobility for current and future 
generations (Williams 2017; Litman 2021) so transport is particularly 
linked to SDGs 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 13 (Move Humanity 2018; IRP 2019; WBA 2019; SLoCaT 2019; Yin 2019). Table 10.1 summarises 
transport-related topics for these SDGs and corresponding research. 
Section 17.3.3.7 also provides a cross-sectoral overview of synergies 
and trade-offs between climate change mitigation and the SDGs.
10.1.2 Trends, Drivers and the Critical Role 
of Transport in GHG Growth
The transport sector directly emitted around 8.9 Gtonnes (Gt) of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (CO 2-eq) in 2019, up from 5.1 GtCO 2-eq in 1990 
(Figure 10.1). Global transport was the fourth largest source of GHG 
emissions in 2019 following the power, industry, and the agriculture,  (a) Transport global GHG emissions trends
(b) Transport regional GHG emissions trendsInternational aviation
Other (transport)Indirect CO2
International shippingRoad
Domestic aviation
Inland shipping
RailGHG emissions (Gt CO 2-eq yr–1) GHG emissions (Gt CO 2-eq yr–1)057.5105.1 Gt 6.3 Gt 7.6 Gt 8.9 Gt+2.1%/yr +1.7%/yr +1.8%/yr

2%
1%7%1990



















2019Africa AU, JP , NZ E. AsiaE. Europe. 
& W.C. Asia Europe Latin Am. Middle E. N. America S. Asia S.E. Asia
00.511.524%6%9%69%2%
Figure 10.1 | Global and regional transport greenhouse gas emissions trends.  Indirect emissions from electricity and heat consumed in transport are shown in 
panel (a) and are primarily linked to the electrification of rail systems. These indirect emissions do not include the full lifecycle emissions of transportation systems (e.g., vehicle 
manufacturing and infrastructure), which are assessed in Section 10.4. International aviation and shipping are included in panel (a) but excluded from panel (b). Indirect 
emissions from fuel production, vehicle manufacturing and infrastructure construction are not included in the sector total. Source: adapted from Lamb et al. (2021) using data 
from Minx et al. (2021).
Chapter 10 Transport10forestry and land use (AFOLU) sectors. In absolute terms, the transport 
sector accounts for roughly 15% of total GHG emissions and about 23% 
of global energy-related CO 2 emissions (IEA 2020a). Transport-related 
GHG emissions have increased fast over the last two decades, and 
since 2010, the sector’s emissions have increased faster than for any 
other end-use sector, averaging +1.8% annual growth (Section 10.7). 
Addressing emissions from transport is crucial for GHG mitigation 
strategies across many countries, as the sector represents the largest 
energy consuming sector in 40% of countries worldwide. In most 
remaining countries, transport is the second largest energy-consuming 
sector, reflecting different levels of urbanisation and land use patterns, 
speed of demographic changes and socio-economic development (IEA 
2012; Gota et al. 2019; Hasan et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2019).
As of 2019, the largest source of transport emissions is the movement 
of passengers and freight in road transport (6.1 GtCO 2-eq, 69% of the 
sector’s total). International shipping is the second largest emission 
source, contributing 0.8 GtCO 2-eq (9% of the sector’s total), and 
international aviation is third with 0.6 GtCO 2-eq (7% of the sector’s 
total). All other transport emissions sources, including rail, have 
been relatively trivial in comparison, totalling 1.4 GtCO 2-eq in 2019. 
Between 2010 and 2019, international aviation had among the fastest 
growing GHG emissions among all segments (+3.4% per year), while 
road transport remained one of the fastest growing (+1.7% per year) 
among all global energy-using sectors. Note that the COVID-19-
induced economic lockdowns implemented since 2020 have had 
a very substantial impact on transport emissions – higher than any 
other sector (Chapter  2). Preliminary estimates from Crippa et  al. 
(2021) suggest that global transport CO 2 emissions declined to 
7.6 GtCO 2 in 2020, a reduction of 11.6% compared to 2019 (Crippa 
et al. 2021; Minx et al. 2021). These lockdowns affected all transport 
segments, and particularly international aviation (estimated 45% 
reduction in 2020 global CO 2 emissions), road transport (–10%), and 
domestic aviation (–9.3%). By comparison, aggregate CO 2 emissions 
across all sectors are estimated to have declined by 5.1% as a result 
of the COVID-19 pandemic (Section 2.2.2).
Growth in transport-related GHG emissions has taken place across 
most world regions (see Figure  10.1b). Between 1990 and 2019, 
growth in emissions was relatively slow in Europe, Australia, Japan and 
New Zealand, Eurasia, and North America while it was unprecedently 
fast in other regions. Driven by economic and population growth, 
the annual growth rates in Eastern Asia, Southern Asia, South-East 
Asia and Pacific, and Africa were 6.1%, 5.2%, 4.7%, and 4.1%, 
respectively. Latin America and the Middle East have seen somewhat 
slower growth in transport-related GHG emissions (annual growth 
rates of 2.4% and 3.3%, respectively) (ITF 2019; Minx et al. 2021). 
Section 10.7 provides a more detailed comparison of global transport 
emissions trends with those from regional and sub-sectoral studies.
The rapid growth in global transport emissions is primarily a result of 
the fast growth in global transport activity levels, which grew by 73% 
between 2000 and 2018. Passenger and freight activity growth have 
outpaced energy efficiency and fuel economy improvements in this 
period (ITF 2019). The global increase in passenger travel activities 
has taken place almost entirely in non-OECD countries, often starting 
from low motorisation rates (SLoCaT 2018a). Passenger cars, two- and three-wheelers, and mini buses contribute about 75% of passenger 
transport-related CO 2 emissions, while collective transport services (bus 
and railways) generate about 7% of the passenger transport-related 
CO2 emissions despite covering a fifth of passenger transport globally 
(Rodrigue 2017; Halim et al. 2018; Sheng et al. 2018; SLoCaT 2018a; 
Gota et  al. 2019). While alternative lighter powertrains have great 
potential for mitigating GHG emissions from cars, the trend has been 
towards increasing vehicle size and engine power within all vehicle 
size classes, driven by consumer preferences towards larger sport 
utility vehicles (SUVs) (IEA 2020a). On a global scale, SUV sales have 
been constantly growing in the last decade, with 40% of the vehicles 
sold in 2019 being SUVs (IEA 2020a) (Section 10.4, Box 10.3).
Indirect emissions from electricity and heat shown in Figure  10.1 
account for only a  small fraction of current emissions from the 
transport sector (2%) and are associated with electrification of 
certain modes like rail or bus transport (Lamb et al. 2021). Increasing 
transport electrification will affect indirect emissions, especially 
where carbon-intense electricity grids operate.
Global freight transport, measured in tonne-kilometres (tkm), 
grew by 68% between 2000 and 2015 and is projected to grow 
3.3 times by 2050 (ITF 2019). If unchecked, this growth will make 
decarbonisation of freight transport very difficult (McKinnon 2018; 
ITF 2019). International trade and global supply chains from industries 
frequently involving large geographical distances are responsible for 
the fast increase of CO 2 emissions from freight transport (Yeh et al. 
2017; McKinnon 2018), which are growing faster than emissions 
from passenger transport (Lamb et  al. 2021). Heavy-duty vehicles 
(HDVs) make a disproportionate contribution to air pollution, relative 
to their global numbers, because of their substantial emissions of 
particulate matter and of black carbon with high short-term warming 
potentials (Anenberg et al. 2019).
On-road passenger and freight vehicles dominate global transport-
related CO 2 emissions and offer the largest mitigation potential (Taptich 
et al. 2016; Halim et al. 2018). This chapter examines a wide range 
of possible transport emission reduction strategies. These strategies 
can be categorised under the ‘Avoid-Shift-Improve’ (ASI) framework 
described in Chapter 5 (Taptich et al. 2016). ‘Avoid’ strategies reduce 
total vehicle travel. They include compact communities and other 
policies that minimise travel distances and promote efficient transport 
through pricing and demand management programmes. ‘Shift’ 
strategies shift travel from higher-emitting to lower-emitting modes. 
These strategies include more multimodal planning that improves 
active and collective transport modes, complete streets roadway 
design, high occupant vehicle priority strategies that favour shared 
modes, Mobility as a Service (MaaS), and multimodal navigation and 
payment apps. ‘Improve’ strategies reduce per-kilometre emission 
rates. These strategies include hybrid and electric vehicle incentives, 
lower-carbon and cleaner fuels, high-emitting vehicle scrappage 
programmes, and efficient driving and anti-idling campaigns (Lutsey 
and Sperling 2012; Gota et al. 2015). These topics are assessed within 
the rest of this chapter, including how combinations of ASI with new 
technologies can potentially lead from incremental interventions 
into low-carbon transformative transport improvements that include 
social and equity benefits (Section 10.8).
Transport  Chapter 1010
10.1.3 Climate Adaptation on the Transport Sector
Climate change impacts such as extremely high temperatures, intense 
rainfall leading to flooding, more intense winds and/or storms, and 
sea level rise can seriously impact transport infrastructure, operations, 
and mobility for road, rail, shipping, and aviation. Studies since AR5 
confirm that serious challenges to all transport infrastructures are 
increasing, with consequent delays or derailing (Miao et  al. 2018; 
Moretti and Loprencipe 2018; Pérez-Morales et al. 2019; Palin et al. 
2021). These impacts have been increasingly documented but, 
according to Forzieri et  al. (2018), little is known about the risks 
of multiple climate extremes on critical infrastructures at local to 
continental scales. All roads, bridges, rail systems, and ports are likely 
to be affected to some extent. Flexible pavements are particularly 
vulnerable to extreme high temperatures that can cause permanent 
deformation and crumbling of asphalt (Underwood et al. 2017; Qiao 
et al. 2019). Rail systems are also vulnerable, with a variety of hazards, 
both meteorological and non-meteorological, affecting railway asset 
lifetimes. Severe impacts on railway infrastructure and operations 
can arise from the occurrence of temperatures below freezing, excess 
precipitation, storms and wildfires (Thaduri et al. 2020; Palin et al. 
2021) as can impacts on underground transport systems (Forero-
Ortiz et al. 2020).
Most countries are examining opportunities for combined mitigation-
adaptation efforts, using the need to mitigate climate change 
through transport-related GHG emissions reductions and reduction 
of pollutants as the basis for adaptation action (Thornbush et  al. 
2013; Wang et al. 2020). For example, urban sprawl indirectly affects 
climate processes, increasing emissions and vulnerability, which 
worsens the potential to adapt (Congedo and Munafò 2014; Macchi 
and Tiepolo 2014). Hence, using a range of forms of rapid transit 
as structuring elements for urban growth can mitigate climate 
change-related risks as well as emissions, reducing impacts on new 
infrastructure, often in more vulnerable areas (Newman et al. 2017). 
Such changes are increasingly seen as having economic benefit 
(Ha et  al. 2017), especially in developing nations (Chang 2016; 
Monioudi et al. 2018).
Since AR5 there has been a growing awareness of the potential and 
actual impacts from global sea level rise due to climate change on 
transport systems (Dawson et al. 2016; Rasmussen et al. 2018; IPCC 
2019; Noland et al. 2019), particularly on port facilities (Stephenson 
et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018b; Pérez-Morales et al. 2019). Similarly, 
recent studies suggest changes in global jet streams could affect 
the aviation sector (Staples et al. 2018; Becken and Shuker 2019), 
and extreme weather conditions can affect runways (heat buckling) 
and aircraft lift. Combined, climate impacts on aviation could result 
in payload restrictions and disruptions (Coffel et al. 2017; Monioudi 
et  al. 2018). According to Williams (2017), studies have indicated 
that the amount of moderate-or-greater clear-air turbulence on 
transatlantic flight routes in winter will increase significantly in 
the future as the climate changes. More research is needed to fully 
understand climate-induced risks to transportation systems.10.1.4 Transport Disruption and Transformation
Available evidence suggests that transport-related CO 2 emissions 
would need to be restricted to about 2 to 3 Gt in 2050 (1.5°C 
scenario-1.5DS, B2DS), or about 70 to 80% below 2015 levels, to meet 
the goals set in the Paris Agreement. It also indicates that a balanced 
and inter-modal application of Avoid, Shift, and Improve measures is 
capable of yielding an estimated reduction in transport emissions of 
2.39 GtCO 2-equivalent by 2030 and 5.74 GtCO 2-equivalent by 2050 
(IPCC 2018; Gota et al. 2019). Such a transformative decarbonisation 
of the global transport system requires, in addition to technological 
changes, a  paradigm shift that ensures prioritisation of high-
accessibility transport solutions that minimise the amount of mobility 
required to meet people’s needs, and favours transit and active 
transport modes (Lee and Handy 2018; SLoCaT 2021). These changes 
are sometimes called disruptive as they are frequently surprising in 
how they accelerate through a technological system.
The assessment of transport innovations and their mitigation potentials 
is at the core of how this chapter examines the possibilities for changing 
transport-related GHG trajectories. The transport technology innovation 
literature analysed in this chapter emphasises how a  mixture of 
mitigation technology options and social changes are now converging 
and how, in combination, they may have potential to accelerate trends 
toward a low-carbon transport transition. Such changes are considered 
disruptive or transformative (Sprei 2018). Of the current transport 
trends covered in the literature, this chapter focuses on three key 
technology and policy areas: electro-mobility in land-based transport 
vehicles, new fuels for ships and planes, and overall demand reductions 
and efficiency. These strategies are seen as being necessary to integrate 
at all levels of governance and, in combination with the creation of 
fast, extensive, and affordable multimodal public transport networks, 
can help achieve multiple advantages in accordance with SDGs
Electrification of passenger transport in light-duty vehicles (LDVs) is well 
underway as a commercial process with socio-technical transformative 
potential and will be examined in detail in Sections 10.3 and 10.4. 
But the rapid mainstreaming of electric vehicles (EVs) will still need 
enabling conditions for land transport to achieve the shift away from 
petroleum fuels, as outlined in Chapter 3 and detailed in Section 10.8. 
The other mitigation options reviewed in this chapter are so far only 
incremental and are less commercial, especially shipping and aviation 
fuels, so stronger enabling conditions are likely, as detailed further in 
Sections 10.5 to 10.8. The enabling conditions that would be needed 
for the development of an emerging technological solution for such 
fuels are likely to be very different from those for electromobility, but 
nevertheless they both will need demand and efficiency changes to 
ensure they are equitable and inclusive.
Section  10.2 sets out the transformation of transport through 
examining systemic changes that affect demand for transport 
services and the efficiency of the system. Section 10.3 looks at the 
most promising technological innovations in vehicles and fuels. 
The  next three sections (10.4, 10.5, and 10.6) examine mitigation 
options for land transport, aviation, and shipping. Section  10.7 
describes the space of solutions assessed in a range of integrated 
modelling and sectoral transport scenarios. Finally, Section 10.8 sets 
Chapter 10 Transport10out what would be needed for the most transformative scenario that 
can manage to achieve the broad goals set out in Chapter 3 and the 
transport goals set out in Section 10.7.
10.2 Systemic Changes in the Transport Sector
Systemic change is the emergence of new organisational patterns that 
affect the structure of a system. While much attention has been given 
to engine and fuel technologies to mitigate GHG emissions from the 
transport sector, population dynamics, finance and economic systems, 
urban form, culture, and policy also drive emissions from the sector. 
Thus, systemic change requires innovations in these components. 
These systemic changes offer the opportunity to decouple transport 
emissions from economic growth. In turn, such decoupling allows 
environmental improvements like reduced GHG emissions without 
loss of economic activity (UNEP 2011; UNEP 2013; Newman et  al. 
2017; IPCC 2018).
There is evidence that suggests decoupling of transport emissions and 
economic growth is already happening in developed and developing 
countries. Europe and China have shown the most dramatic changes 
(Huizenga et  al. 2015; Gao and Newman 2018; SLoCaT 2018b) 
and many cities are demonstrating decoupling of transport-related 
emissions through new net zero urban economic activity (Loo and 
Banister 2016; SLoCaT 2018a). A continued and accelerated 
decoupling of the growth of transport-related GHG emissions from 
economic growth is crucial for meeting the SDGs, as outlined in 
Section 10.1. This section focuses on several overlapping components 
of systemic change in the transport sector that affect the drivers of 
GHG emissions: urban form, physical geography, and infrastructure; 
behaviour and mode choice; and new demand concepts. Table 10.3 
at the end of the section provides a high-level summary of the effect 
of these systemic changes on emissions from the transport sector.
10.2.1 Urban Form, Physical Geography, 
and Transport Infrastructure
The physical characteristics that make up built areas define the 
urban form. These physical characteristics include the shape, size, 
density, and configuration of the human settlements. Urban form 
is intrinsically coupled with the infrastructure that allows human 
settlements to operate. In the context of the transport sector, urban form and urban infrastructure influence the time and cost of travel, 
which, in turn, drive travel demand and modal choice (Marchetti and 
Ausubel 2001; Newman and Kenworthy 2015).
Throughout history, three main urban fabrics have developed, each 
with different effects on transport patterns based on a fixed travel 
time budget of around one hour (Newman et  al. 2016). The high-
density urban fabric developed over the past several millennia 
favoured walking and active transport for only a few kilometres (km). 
In the mid-19th  century, urban settlements developed a  medium-
density fabric that favoured trains and trams traveling over 10 to 

has favoured automobile travel, enabling mass movement between 

on GHG emissions and other well-being indicators.
Since AR5, urban design has increasingly been seen as a  major 
way to influence the GHG emissions from urban transport systems. 
Indeed, research suggests that implementing urban form changes 
could reduce GHG emissions from urban transport by 25% in 
2050, compared with a business-as-usual scenario (Creutzig et al. 
2015b; Creutzig 2016). Researchers have identified a  variety 
of variables to study the relationship between urban form and 
transport-related GHG emissions. Three notable aspects summarise 
these relationships: urban space utilisation, urban spatial form, 
and urban transportation infrastructure (Tian et  al. 2020). Urban 
density (population or employment density) and land-use mix 
define the urban space utilisation. Increases in urban density and 
mixed function can effectively reduce per capita car use by reducing 
the number of trips and shortening travel distances. Similarly, the 
continuity of urban space and the dispersion of centres reduces 
travel distances (Tian et al. 2020), though such changes are rarely 
achieved without shifting transport infrastructure investments 
away from road capacity increases (Newman and Kenworthy 2015; 
McIntosh et al. 2017). For example, increased investment in public 
transport coverage, optimal transfer plans, shorter transit travel 
time, and improved transit travel efficiency make public transit more 
attractive (Heinen et al. 2017; Nugroho et al. 2018a; Nugroho et al. 
2018b) and hence increase density and land values (Sharma and 
Newman 2020). Similarly, forgoing the development of major roads 
for the development of pedestrian and bike pathways enhances the 
attractiveness of active transport modes (Zahabi et al. 2016; Keall 
et al. 2018; Tian et al. 2020).
Table 10.2 | The systemic effect of city form and transport emissions.
Annual transport emissions and co-benefits Walking urban fabric Transit urban fabric Automobile urban fabric
Transport GHG 4 tonnes per person 6 tonnes per person 8 tonnes per person
Health benefits from walkability High Medium Low
Equity of locational accessibility High Medium Low
Construction and household waste 0.87 tonnes per person 1.13 tonnes per person 1.59 tonnes per person
Water consumption 35 kilolitre per person 42 kilolitre per person 70 kilolitre per person
Land 133 square metres per person 214 square metres per person 547 square metres per person
Economics of infrastructure and transport operations High Medium Low
Source: Newman et al. (2016); Thomson and Newman (2018); Seto et al. (2021).
Transport  Chapter 1010
10.2.2 Behaviour and Mode Choice
Behaviour continues to be a  major source of interest in the 
decarbonisation of transport as it directly addresses demand. 
Behaviour is about people’s actions based on their preferences. 
Chapter 5 described an ‘Avoid, Shift, Improve’ process for demand-
side changes that affect sectoral emissions. This section discusses 
some of the drivers of behaviour related to the transport sector and 
how they link to this ‘Avoid, Shift, Improve’ process.Avoid: the effect of prices and income on demand. Research 
has shown that household income and price have a strong influence 
on people’s preferences for transport services (Bakhat et  al. 2017; 
Palmer et al. 2018). The relationship between income and demand 
is defined by the income elasticity of demand. For example, research 
suggests that in China, older and wealthier populations continued to 
show a preference for car travel (Yang et al. 2019) while younger and 
low-income travellers sought variety in transport modes (Song et al. 
2018). Similarly, Bergantino et  al. (2018b) evaluated the income Ultimately, infrastructure investments influence the structural 
dependence on cars, which in turn influence the lock-in or path 
dependency of transport options with their greenhouse emissions 
(Newman et al. 2015; Grieco and Urry 2016). The 21st century saw 
a  new trend to reach peak car use in some countries as a  result 
of a  revival in walking and transit use (Grieco and Urry 2016; Newman et al. 2017; Gota et al. 2019). While some cities continue 
on a trend towards reaching peak car use on a per-capita basis, for 
example Shanghai and Beijing (Gao and Newman 2020), there is 
a need for increased investments in urban form strategies that can 
continue to reduce car dependency around the world.
Cross-Chapter Box 7 | Urban Form: Simultaneously Reducing Urban Transport Emissions, 
Avoiding Infrastructure Lock-in, and Providing Accessible Services
Authors: Felix Creutzig (Germany), Karen C. Seto (the United States of America), Peter Newman (Australia)
Urban transport is responsible for about 8% of global CO 2 emissions or 3 GtCO 2 per year (Chapters 5 and 8). In contrast to energy 
supply technologies, urban transport directly interacts with mobility lifestyles (Section 5.4). Similarly, non-GHG emission externalities, 
such as congestion, air pollution, noise, and safety, directly affect urban quality of life, and result in considerable welfare losses. 
Low-carbon, highly accessible urban design is not only a major mitigation option, it also provides for more inclusive city services 
related to well-being (Sections 5.1 and 5.2). Urban planning and design of cities for people are central to realise emission reductions 
without relying simply on technologies, though the modes of transport favoured will influence the ability to overcome the lock-in 
around automobile use (Gehl 2010; Creutzig et al. 2015b).
Where lock-in has occurred, other strategies may alleviate the GHG emissions burden. Urban planning still plays a key role in recreating 
local hubs. Available land can be used to build rail-based transit, made financially viable by profiting from land value captured around 
stations (Ratner and Goetz 2013). Shared or pooled mobility can offer flexible on-demand mobility solutions that are efficient also in 
suburbs and for integrating with longer commuting trips (ITF 2017).
Global emissions trajectories of urban transport will be decided in rapidly urbanising Asia and Africa. Urban transport-related GHG 
emissions are driven by incomes and car ownership but there is considerable variation among cities with similar income and car ownership 
levels (Newman and Kenworthy 2015). While electrification is a key strategy to decarbonise urban transport, urban infrastructures can 
make a difference of up to a factor of 10 in energy use and induced GHG emissions (Erdogan 2020). Ongoing urbanisation patterns 
risk future lock-in of induced demand on GHG emissions, constraining lifestyles to energy-intensive and high CO 2-related technologies 
(Erickson and Tempest 2015; Seto et al. 2016) (Sections 5.4, 8.2.3 and 10.2.1). Instead, climate solutions can be locked into urban policies 
and infrastructures (Ürge-Vorsatz et al. 2018) especially through the enhancement of the walking and transit urban fabric. Avoiding urban 
sprawl, associated with several externalities (Dieleman and Wegener 2004), is a necessary decarbonisation condition, and can be guided 
macro-economically by increasing fuel prices and marginal costs of motorised transport (Creutzig 2014). Resulting urban forms not only 
reduce GHG emission from transport but also from buildings, as greater compactness results in reduced thermal loss (Borck and Brueckner 
2018). Health benefits from reduced car dependence are an increasing element driving this policy agenda (Speck 2018) (Section 10.8).
Low-carbon highly accessible urban design is not only a major mitigation option, it also provides for more inclusive city services related 
to well-being (Sections 5.1 and 5.2). Solutions involve planning cities around walkable sub-centres, where multiple destinations, such 
as shopping, jobs, leisure activities, and others, can be accessed within a 10 minute walk or bicycle ride (Newman and Kenworthy 
2006). Overall, the mitigation potential of urban planning is about 25% in 2050 compared with a business-as-usual scenario (Creutzig 
et al. 2015a; Creutzig et al. 2015b). Much higher levels of decarbonisation can be achieved if cities take on a regenerative development 
approach and act as geo-engineering systems on the atmosphere (Thomson and Newman 2016).
Chapter 10 Transport10elasticity of transport by mode in the UK. They found that the income 
elasticity for private cars is 0.714, while the income elasticities of rail 
and bus use are 3.253 (the greater elasticity, the more the demand 
will grow or decline, depending on income). Research has also shown 
a positive relationship between income and demand for air travel, 
with income elasticities of air travel demand being positive and 
as large as 2 (Gallet and Doucouliagos 2014; Valdes 2015; Hakim 
and Merkert 2016; Hakim and Merkert 2019; Hanson et al. 2022). 
A survey in 98 Indian cities also showed income as the main factor 
influencing travel demand (Ahmad and de Oliveira 2016). Thus, as 
incomes and wealth across the globe rise, demand for travel is likely 
to increase as well.
The price elasticity of demand measures changes in demand as 
a result of changes in the prices of the services. In a meta-analysis of 
the price elasticity of energy demand, Labandeira et al. (2017) report 
the average long-term price elasticity of demand for gasoline and 
diesel to be –0.773 and –0.443, respectively. That is, demand will 
decline with increasing prices. A similar analysis of long-term data in 
the United States (US), the United Kingdom (UK), Sweden, Australia, 
and Germany reports the gasoline price elasticity of demand for car 
travel (as measured through vehicle-kilometre – vkm – per capita) 
ranges between –0.1 and –0.4 (Bastian et al. 2016). For rail travel, 
the price elasticity of demand has been found to range between 
–1.05 and –1.1 (Zeng et al. 2021). Similarly, price elasticities for air 
travel range from –0.53 to –1.91 depending on various factors such 
as purpose of travel (business or leisure), season, and month and day 
of departure (Morlotti et al. 2017). The price elasticities of demand 
suggest that car use is inelastic to prices, while train use is relatively 
inelastic to the cost of using rail. Conversely, consumers seem to be 
more responsive to the cost of flying, so that strategies that increase 
the cost of flying are likely to contribute to some avoidance of 
aviation-related GHG emissions.
While the literature continues to show that time, cost, and income 
dominate people’s travel choices (Ahmad and de Oliveira 2016; 
Capurso et al. 2019; He et al. 2020), there is also evidence of a role 
for personal values, and environmental values in particular, shaping 
choices within these structural limitations (Bouman and Steg 2019). 
For example, individuals are more likely to drive less when they care 
about the environment (De Groot et al. 2008; Abrahamse et al. 2009; 
Jakovcevic and Steg 2013; Hiratsuka et al. 2018; Ünal et al. 2019). 
Moreover, emotional and symbolic factors affect the level of car 
use (Steg 2005). Differences in behaviour may also result due 
to differences in gender, age, norms, values, and social status. For 
example, women have been shown to be more sensitive to parking 
pricing than men (Simićević et al. 2020).
Finally, structural shocks, such as a financial crisis, a pandemic, or the 
impacts of climate change could affect the price and income elasticities 
of demand for transport services (van Ruijven et al. 2019). COVID-19 
lockdowns reduced travel demand by 19% (aviation by 32%) and 
some of the patterns that have emerged from the lockdowns could 
permanently change the elasticity of demand for transport (Tirachini 
and Cats 2020; Hendrickson and Rilett 2020; Newman 2020a; SLoCaT 
2021; Hanson et  al. 2022). In particular, the COVID-19 lockdowns 
have spurred two major trends: electronic communications replacing many work and personal travel requirements; and revitalised local 
active transport and e-micromobility (Newman 2020a; SLoCaT 
2021). The permanence of these changes post-COVID-19 is 
uncertain but possible (Earley and Newman 2021) (Cross-Chapter 
Box 1 in Chapter 1). However, these changes will require growth of 
infrastructure for better ICT bandwidths in developing countries, and 
better provision for micromobility in all cities.
Shift: mode choice for urban and intercity transport. Shifting 
demand patterns (as opposed to avoiding demand) can be particularly 
important in decarbonising the transport sector. As a  result, the 
cross-elasticity of demand across transport modes is of particular 
interest for understanding the opportunities for modal shift. The 
cross-elasticity represents the demand effect on mode i (e.g., bus) 
when an attribute of mode j (e.g., rail) changes marginally. Studies 
on the cross-elasticities of mode choice for urban travel suggest that 
the cross-elasticity for car demand is low, but the cross-elasticities of 
walking, bus, and rail with respect to cars are relatively large (Fearnley 
et al. 2017; Wardman et al. 2018). In practice, these cross-elasticities 
suggest that car drivers are not very responsive to increased prices 
for public transit, but transit users are responsive to reductions in the 
cost of driving. When looking at the cross-elasticities of public transit 
options (bus vs metro vs rail), research suggests that consumers are 
particularly sensitive to in-vehicle and waiting time when choosing 
public transit modes (Fearnley et  al. 2018). These general results 
provide additional evidence that increasing the use of active and 
public transport requires interventions that make car use more 
expensive while making public transit more convenient (e.g., smart 
apps that tell the user the exact time for transit arrival (Box 10.1)).
The literature on mode competition for intercity travel reveals that 
while cost of travel is a significant factor (Zhang et al. 2017), sensitivity 
decreases with increasing income as well as when the cost of the 
trip was paid by someone else (Capurso et al. 2019). Some research 
suggests little competition between bus and air travel but the cross-
elasticity between air and rail suggest strong interactions (Wardman 
et  al. 2018). Price reduction strategies such as discounted rail fares 
could enhance the switch from air travel to high-speed rail. Both air 
fares and flight frequency impact high-speed rail (HSR) usage (Zhang 
et al. 2019b). Airline companies reduce fares on routes that are directly 
competing with HSR (Bergantino et al. 2018a) and charge high fares 
on non-HSR routes (Xia and Zhang 2016). On the Rome to Milan route, 
better frequency and connections, and low costs of HSR resulting from 
competition between HSR companies have significantly reduced air 
travel and shares of buses and cars (Desmaris and Croccolo 2018).
Finally, and as noted in Chapter  5, recent research shows that 
individual, social, and infrastructure factors also affect people’s mode 
choices. For example, perceptions about common travel behaviour 
(what people perceive to be ‘normal’ behaviour) influence their travel 
mode choice. The research suggests that well-informed individuals 
whose personal norms match low-carbon objectives, and who 
believe they have control over their decisions, are most motivated 
to shift mode. Nonetheless, such individual and social norms can 
only marginally influence mode choice unless infrastructure factors 
can enable reasonable time and cost savings (Convery and Williams 
2019; Javaid et al. 2020; Feng et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021).
Transport  Chapter 1010
Improve: consumer preferences for improved and alternative 
vehicles. While reductions in demand for travel and changes in 
mode choice can contribute to reducing GHG emissions from the 
transport sector, cars are likely to continue to play a prominent role. 
As a  result, improving the performance of cars will be crucial for 
the decarbonisation of the transport sector. Sections 10.3 and 10.4 
describe the technological options available for reduced CO 2 emissions 
from vehicles. The effectiveness in deploying such technologies will 
partly depend on consumer preferences and their effect on adoption 
rates. Given the expanded availability of electric vehicles, there is also 
a growing body of work on the drivers of vehicle choice. A survey in 
Nanjing found women had more diverse travel purposes than men, 
resulting in a  greater acceptance of electric bikes (Lin et  al. 2017). 
Individuals are more likely to adopt an electric vehicle (EV) when they 
think this adoption benefits the environment or implies a  positive 
personal attribute (Noppers et al. 2014; Noppers et al. 2015; Haustein 
and Jensen 2018). Other work suggests that people’s preference for EVs 
depends upon vehicle attributes, infrastructure availability, and policies 
that promote EV adoption, specifically, purchasing and operating costs, 
driving range, charging duration, vehicle performance, and brand 
diversity (Liao et  al. 2016). Behaviour change to enable transport 
transformations will need to make the most of these factors while also 
working on the more structural issues of time, space, and cost.
10.2.3 New Demand Concepts
Structural and behavioural choices that drive transport-related GHG 
emissions, such as time and cost based on geography of freight and 
urban fabric, are likely to continue to be major factors. But there is 
also a variation within each structural choice that is based around 
personal demand factors related to values that indirectly change 
choices in transport. Chapter  5 identified three megatrends that 
affect demand for services, including circular economy, the shared 
economy, and digitalisation. These three megatrends can have 
specific effect on transport emissions, as described below.
Circular economy. The problem of resources and their environmental 
impacts is driving the move to a  circular economy (Bleischwitz 
et al. 2017). Circular economy principles include increased material 
efficiency, reusing or extending product lifetimes, recycling, and 
green logistics. Dematerialisation, the reduction in the quantity of the 
materials used in the production of one unit of output, is a circular 
economy principle that can affect the operations and emissions of 
the transport sector, as reductions in the quantities of materials used 
reduce transport needs, while reductions in the weight of products 
improve the efficiency of transporting them. Dematerialisation can 
occur through more efficient production processes but also when 
a  new product is developed to provide the same functionality as 
multiple products. The best example of this trend is a smart phone, 
which provides the service of at least 22 other former devices (Rifkin 
2019). A move to declutter lifestyles can also drive dematerialisation 
(Whitmarsh et al. 2017). Some potential for dematerialisation has been 
suggested due to 3-D printing, which would also reduce transport 
emissions through localised production of product components 
(d’Aveni 2015; UNCTAD 2018). There is evidence to suggest, however, 
that reductions in material use resulting from more efficient product design or manufacturing are offset by increased consumer demand 
(Kasulaitis et al. 2019). Whether or not dematerialisation can lead 
to reduction of emissions from the transport sector is still an open 
question that requires evaluating the entire product ecosystem 
(Van Loon et al. 2014; Coroama et al. 2015; Kasulaitis et al. 2019).
Shared economy. Shared mobility is arguably the most rapidly 
growing and evolving sector of the sharing economy and includes 
bike sharing, e-scooter sharing, car sharing, and on-demand mobility 
(Greenblatt and Shaheen 2015). The values of creating a more shared 
economy are related to both reduced demand and greater efficiency, 
as well as the notion of community well-being associated with the 
act of sharing instead of simply owning for oneself (Maginn et al. 
2018; Sharp 2018). The literature on shared mobility is expanding, 
but there is much uncertainty about the effect shared mobility will 
have on transport demand and associated emissions (Nijland and 
Jordy 2017; ITF 2018a; Tikoudis et al. 2021).
Asia represents the largest car-sharing region with 58% of worldwide 
membership and 43% of global fleets deployed (Dhar et  al. 2020). 
Europe accounts for 29% of worldwide members and 37% of shared 
vehicle fleets (Shaheen et  al. 2018). Ride-sourcing and carpooling 
systems are among the many new entrants in the short-term shared 
mobility options. On-demand transport options complemented with 
technology have enhanced the possibility of upscaling (Alonso-
González et al. 2018). Car sharing could provide the same level of service 
as taxis, but taxis could be three times more expensive (Cuevas et al. 
2016). The sharing economy, as an emerging economic-technological 
phenomenon (Kaplan and Haenlein 2010), is likely to be a key driver 
of demand for transport of goods although data shows increasing 
container movement due to online shopping (Suel and Polak 2018).
There is growing evidence that this more structured form of behavioural 
change through shared economy practices, supported by a larger group 
than a single family, has a much greater potential to save transport 
emissions, especially when complemented with decarbonised grid 
electricity (Greenblatt and Shaheen 2015; Sharp 2018). Carpooling, 
for example, could result in an 11% reduction in vehicle-kilometres 
and a 12% reduction in emissions, as carpooling requires less empty 
or non-productive passenger-kilometres (pkm) (ITF 2020a; ITF 2020b). 
However, the use of local shared mobility systems such as on-demand 
transport may create more transport emissions if there is an overall 
modal shift out of transit (ITF 2018a; Schaller 2018). Similarly, some 
work suggests that commercial shared vehicle services such as Uber 
and Lyft are leading to increased vehicle km travelled (and associated 
GHG emissions) in part due to deadheading (Schaller 2018; Tirachini 
and Gomez-Lobo 2020; Ward et al. 2021). Successful providers compete 
by optimising personal comfort and convenience rather than enabling 
a sharing culture (Eckhardt and Bardhi 2015), and concerns have been 
raised regarding the wider societal impacts of these systems and for 
specific user groups such as older people (Fitt 2018; Marsden 2018). 
Concerns have also been expressed over the financial viability of demand-
responsive transport systems (Ryley et al. 2014; Marsden 2018), how 
the mainstreaming of shared mobility systems can be institutionalised 
equitably, and the operation and governance of existing systems that 
are only mode- and operator-focused (Akyelken et al. 2018; Jittrapirom 
et al. 2018; Pangbourne et al. 2020; Marsden 2018).
Chapter 10 Transport10Digitalisation. In the context of the transport sector, digitalisation 
has enabled teleworking, which in turn reduces travel demand. On 
the other hand, the prevalence of online shopping, enabled by the 
digital economy, could have mixed effects on transport emissions 
(Le et al. 2021). For example, online shopping could reduce vehicle-
kilometres travelled but the move to expedited or rush delivery could 
mitigate some benefits as it prevents consolidation of freight (Jaller 
and Pahwa 2020).
Digitalisation could also lead to systemic changes by enabling 
smart mobility. The smart mobility paradigm refers to the process 
and practices of assimilation of ICTs and other sophisticated high-
technology innovations into transport (Noy and Givoni 2018). Smart 
mobility can be used to influence transport demand and efficiency 
(Benevolo et  al. 2016). The synergies of emerging technologies 
(ICT, internet of things, big data) and shared economy could overcome some of the challenges facing the adoption of emerging technologies 
(Marletto 2014; Chen et al. 2016; Weiss et al. 2018; Taiebat and Xu 
2019) and enable the expected large growth in emerging cities to be 
more sustainable (Docherty et al. 2018). However, ICT, in particular the 
internet of things (IoT), could also cause more global energy demand 
(Hittinger and Jaramillo 2019). Box 10.1 summarises the main smart 
technologies being adopted rapidly by cities across the world and their 
use in transport. There is a growing body of literature about the effect of 
smart technology (including sensors guiding vehicles) on the demand 
for transport services. Smart technologies can improve competitiveness 
of transit and active transport over personal vehicle use by combining 
the introduction of new electro-mobility that improves time and cost 
along with behaviour change factors (Pålsson et  al. 2017; SLoCaT 
2018a; SLoCaT 2018b; SLoCaT2021). However, it is unclear what the 
net effect of smart technology on GHG emissions from the transport 
sector will be (Debnath et al. 2014; Lenz and Heinrichs 2017).
Box 10.1 | Smart City Technologies and Transport
Information and communication technology (ICT). ICT is at the core of smart mobility and will provide the avenue for data to be 
collected and shared across the mobility system. The use of ICT can help cities by providing real-time information on mobility options 
that can inform those using private vehicles, along with transit users or those using bikes or walking. ICT can help with ticketing 
and payment for transit or for road user charges (Tafidis et al. 2017; Gössling 2018) when combined with other technologies such as 
Blockchain (Hargroves et al. 2020).
Internet of Things sensors. Sensors can be used to collect data to improve road safety, improve fuel efficiency of vehicles, and reduce 
CO2 emissions (Kubba and Jiang 2014; Kavitha et al. 2018). Sensors can also provide data to digitally simulate transport planning 
options, inform the greater utilisation of existing infrastructure and modal interconnections, and significantly improve disaster and 
emergency responses (Hargroves et al. 2017). In particular, IoT sensors can be used to inform the operation of fast-moving trackless 
trams and their associated last-mile connectivity shuttles as part of a transit activated corridor (Newman et al. 2019, 2021).
Mobility as a Service. New, app-based mobility platforms will allow for the integration of different transport modes (such as last-mile 
travel, shared transit, and even micro-transit such as scooters or bikes) into easy-to-use platforms. By integrating these modes, users will 
be able to navigate from A to B to C based on which modes are most efficient, with the necessary bookings and payments being made 
through one service. With smart city planning, these platforms can steer users towards shared and rapid transit (which should be the 
centrepiece of these systems), rather than encourage more people to opt for the perceived convenience of booking a single-passenger ride 
(Becker et al. 2020). In low-density car-dependent cities, however, MaaS services such as the use of electric scooters/bikes are less effective 
as the distances are too long and they do not enable the easy sharing that can happen in dense station precincts (Jittrapirom et al. 2017).
Artificial intelligence (AI) and big data analytics. The rapidly growing level of technology enablement of vehicles and urban infrastructure, 
combined with the growing ability to analyse larger and larger data sets, presents a significant opportunity for transport planning, design, 
and operation in the future. These technologies are used together to enable decisions about what kind of transport planning is used down 
particular corridors. Options such as predictive congestion management of roads and freeways, simulating planning options, and advanced 
shared transit scheduling can provide value to new and existing transit systems (Toole et al. 2015; Anda et al. 2017; Hargroves et al. 2017).
Blockchain or distributed ledger technology. Blockchain technology provides a non-hackable database that can be programmed to 
enable shared services like a local, solar microgrid where both solar and shared electric vehicles can be managed (Green and Newman 
2017). Blockchain can be used for many transport-related applications including being the basis of MaaS or any local shared mobility 
service as it facilitates shared activity without intermediary controls. Other applications include verified vehicle ownership documentation, 
establishing identification, real-time road user pricing, congestion zone charging, vehicle-generated collision information, collection of 
tolls and charges, enhanced freight tracking and authenticity, and automated car parking and payments (Hargroves et al. 2020). This 
type of functionality will be particularly valuable for urban regeneration along a transit activated corridor, where it can be used for 
managing shared solar in and around station precincts as well as managing shared vehicles linked to the whole transport system 
(Newman et al. 2021). This technology can also be used for road user charging along any corridor and by businesses accessing any 
services and in managing freight (Carter and Koh 2018; Nguyen et al. 2019; Hargroves et al. 2020; Sedlmeir et al. 2020).
Transport  Chapter 1010
Autonomous vehicles are the other emerging transport technology 
that have the potential to significantly improve ride quality and 
safety. Planes and high-speed trains are already largely autonomous 
as they are guided in all their movements, especially coming into 
stations and airports, although that does not necessarily mean they 
are driverless. Automation is also being used in new on-road transit 
systems like trackless trams (Ndlovu and Newman 2020)). Private 
vehicles are being fitted with more and more levels of autonomy 
and many are being trialled as ‘driverless’ in cities (Aria et  al. 
2016; Skeete 2018). If autonomous systems can be used to help 
on-road transit become more time- and cost-competitive with cars, 
then the kind of transformative and disruptive changes needed to 
assist decarbonisation of transport become more feasible (Bösch 
et al. 2018; Kassens-Noor et al. 2020; Abe 2021). Similarly, vehicle 
automation could improve vehicle efficiency and reduce congestion, 
which would in turn reduce emissions (Vahidi and Sciarretta 2018; 
Massar et al. 2021). On the other hand, if autonomous cars make 
driving more convenient, they could reduce demand for transit (Auld 
et al. 2017; Sonnleitner et al. 2021). Paradoxically, autonomous cars 
could provide access to marginal groups such as the elderly, people 
with disabilities, and those who cannot drive, which could in turn 
increase travel demand (as measured by pkm) (Harper et al. 2016).Heavy haulage trucks in the mining industry are already autonomous 
(Gaber et al. 2021) and automation of long-haul trucks may happen 
sooner than automation of LDVs (Hancock et al. 2019). Autonomous 
trucks may facilitate route and speed optimisation, and reduce fuel 
use, which can in turn reduce emissions (Nasri et al. 2018; Paddeu 
and Denby 2021). There is growing interest in using drones for 
package delivery. Drones could have lower impacts than ground-
based delivery and, if deployed carefully, drones could reduce 
energy use and GHG emissions from freight transport (Stolaroff et al. 
2018). Overall, some commentators are optimistic that smart and 
autonomous technologies can transform the GHG emissions from 
the transport sector (Seba 2014; Rifkin 2019; Sedlmeir et al. 2020). 
Others are more sanguine unless policy interventions can enable the 
technologies to be used for purposes that include zero carbon and 
the SDGs (Faisal et al. 2019; Hancock et al. 2019).
10.2.4 Overall Perspectives on Systemic Change
The interactions between systemic factors set out here and technology 
factors discussed in much more detail in the next sections show that 
there is always going to be a  need to integrate both approaches. 
Table 10.3 | Components of systemic change and their impacts on the transport sector.
Systemic change Mechanisms through which it affects emissions in transport sector and is likely to affect emissions
Changes in urban formDenser, more compact polycentric cities with mixed land use patterns can reduce the distance between where people live, work, and pursue leisure 
activities, which can reduce travel demand. Case studies suggest that these changes in urban form could reduce transport-related GHG emissions 
between 4 to 25%, depending on the setting (Creutzig et al. 2015a; Creutzig et al.2015b; Pan et al. 2020).
Investments in transit and active 
transport infrastructureImproving public transit systems and building infrastructure to support active transport modes (walking and biking) could reduce car travel. Case 
studies suggest that active mobility could reduce emissions from urban transport by 2% to 10% depending on the setting (Creutzig et al. 2016; 
Zahabi et al. 2016; Keall et al. 2018; Gilby et al. 2019; Neves and Brand 2019; Bagheri et al. 2020; Ivanova et al. 2020; Brand et al. 2021). A shift 
to public transit modes can likely offer significant emissions reductions, but estimates are uncertain.
Changes in economic structuresHigher demand as a result of higher incomes could increase emissions, particularly from aviation and shipping. Higher prices could have the 
opposite effect and reduce emissions. Structural changes associated with financial crises, pandemics, or the impacts of climate change could affect 
the elasticity of demand in uncertain ways. Thus, the effect of changes in economic structures on the GHG emissions from the transport sectors 
is uncertain.
TeleworkingA move towards a digital economy that allows workers to work and access information remotely could reduce travel demand. Case studies 
suggest that teleworking could reduce transport emissions by 20% in some instances, but likely by 1%, at most, across the entire transport system 
(Roth et al. 2008; O’Keefe et al. 2016; Shabanpour et al. 2018; O’Brien and Aliabadi 2020).
Dematerialisation of the economyA reduction in goods needed due to combining multiple functions into one device would reduce the need for transport. Reduced weights associated 
with dematerialisation would improve the efficiency of freight transport. However, emissions reductions from these efforts are likely dwarfed by 
increased consumption of goods.
Supply chain managementSupply chains could be optimised to reduce the movement or travel distance of product components. Logistics planning could optimise the use of 
transport infrastructure to increase utilisation rates and decrease travel. The effect of these strategies on the GHG emissions from the transport sector 
is uncertain.
e-commerceThe effect of e-commerce on transport emissions is uncertain. Increased e-commerce would reduce demand for trips to stores but could increase 
demand for freight transport (particularly last-mile delivery) (Jaller and Pahwa 2020; Le et al. 2021).
Smart mobilityICT and smart city technologies can be used to improve the efficiency of operating the transport system. Furthermore, smart technologies can 
improve competitiveness of transit and active transport over personal vehicle use by streamlining mobility options to compete with private cars. 
The effect of smart mobility on the GHG emissions from the transport sector is uncertain (Creutzig 2021).
Shared mobilityShared mobility could increase utilisation rates of LDVs, thus improving the efficiency of the system. However, shared mobility could also divert 
users from transit systems or active transport modes. Studies on ride-sourcing have reported both potential for reductions and increases in transport-
related emissions (Schaller 2018; Ward et al. 2021). Other case studies suggests that carpooling to replace 20% of private car trips could result in 
a 12% reduction in GHG emissions (ITF 2020a; ITF 2020b). Thus, the effect of shared mobility on transport-related GHG emissions is highly uncertain.
Vehicle automationVehicle automation could have positive or negative effects on emissions. Improved transit operations, more efficient traffic management, and 
better routing for light- and heavy-duty transport could reduce emissions (Nasri et al. 2018; Vahidi and Sciarretta 2018; Massar et al. 2021; Paddeu 
and Denby 2021). However, autonomous cars could make car travel more convenient, removing users from transit systems and increasing access 
to marginalised groups, which would in turn increase vehicle-kilometre travelled (Harper et al. 2016; Auld et al. 2017; Sonnleitner et al. 2021). 
Drones could reduce energy use and GHG emissions from freight transport (Stolaroff et al. 2018).
Chapter 10 Transport10Good technology that has the potential to transform transport will 
not be used unless it fulfils broad mobility and accessibility objectives 
related to time, cost, and well-being. Chapter  5 has set out three 
transport transformations based on demand-side factors with highly 
transformative potential. Table  10.3 provides a  summary of these 
systemic changes and their likely impact on GHG emissions. Note that 
the quantitative estimates provided in the table may not be additive 
and the combined effect of these strategies on GHG emissions from 
the transport sector require additional analysis.
10.3 Transport Technology Innovations 
for Decarbonisation
This section focuses on vehicle technology and low-carbon fuel 
innovations to support decarbonisation of the transport sector. 
Figure 10.2 summarises the major pathways reviewed in this section. The advancements in energy carriers described in Figure  10.2 are 
discussed in greater detail in Chapter  6 (Energy) and Chapter  11 
(Industry) but the review presented in this chapter highlights their 
application in the transport sector. This section pays attention to the 
advancements in alternative fuels, electric, and fuel cell technologies 
since AR5.
10.3.1 Alternative Fuels – An Option for Decarbonising 
Internal Combustion Engines
The average fuel consumption of new internal combustion engine 
(ICE) vehicles has improved significantly in recent years due to more 
stringent emissions regulations. However, improvements are now 
slowing down. The average fuel consumption of LDVs decreased by 
only 0.7 % between 2016 and 2017, reaching 7.2 litres of gasoline-
equivalent (Lg-eq) per  100  km in 2017, much slower than the 
Primary
fuelsEnergy
carriersVehicle
technologiesTransportation
segmentHybrid
powertrain
combinations
Advanced
combustion
engineLight-duty
road
vehicles
Heavy-duty
road
vehicles
Aviation
Shipping BiofuelsSynthetic
fuelsAmmoniaHydrogenElectricity
Biomass
with/
without
CCSFossil Fuels
with
CCSNuclearRenewable
Electricity
Fuel cellBattery-
electric
Refuelling infrastructureRefuelling infrastructureCharging infrastructure / Catenary
Catenary Refuelling infrastructure
Refuelling infrastructureRefuelling infrastructure
Refuelling infrastructure
Figure 10.2 | Energy pathways for low-carbon transport technologies.  Primary energy sources are shown in the far left, while the segments of the transport system are in 
the far right. Energy carriers and vehicle technologies are represented in the middle. Primary pathways are shown with solid lines, while dotted lines represent secondary pathways.
Transport  Chapter 1010
1.8 % improvement per year between 2005 and 2016 (GFEI 2020). 
Table  10.4 summarises recent and forthcoming improvements to 
ICE technologies and their effect on emissions from these vehicles. 
However, these improvements are not sufficient to meet deep 
decarbonisation levels in the transport sector. While there is significant 
and growing interest in electric and fuel-cell vehicles, future scenarios 
indicate that a large number of LDV may continue to be operated by 
ICE in conventional, hybrid, and plug-in hybrid configurations over the 
next 30 years (IEA 2019a), unless they are regulated away through 
ICE vehicle sales bans (as some nations have announced) (IEA 2021a). 
Moreover, ICE technologies are likely to remain the prevalent options 
for shipping and aviation. Thus, reducing CO 2 and other emissions from 
ICEs through the use of low-carbon or zero-carbon fuels is essential 
to a balanced strategy for limiting atmospheric pollutant levels. Such 
alternative fuels for ICE vehicles include natural gas-based fuels, 
biofuels, ammonia, and other synthetic fuels.
Natural Gas. Natural gas could be used as an alternative fuel to 
replace gasoline and diesel. Natural gas in vehicles can be used as 
compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG). CNG 
is gaseous at relatively high pressure (10 to 25 megapascal (MPa)) 
and temperature (–40 to 30°C). In contrast, LNG is used in liquid 
form at relatively low pressure (0.1 MPa) and temperature (–160°C). 
Therefore, CNG is particularly suitable for commercial vehicles and 
light- to medium-duty vehicles, whereas LNG is better suited to 
replace diesel in HDVs (Dubov et al. 2020; Dziewiatkowski et al. 2020; 
Yaïci and Ribberink 2021). CNG vehicles have been widely deployed 
in some regions, particularly in Asian-Pacific countries. For example, 
there are about 6 million CNG vehicles in China, the most of any 
country (Qin et al. 2020). However, only 20% of vehicles that operate 
using CNG were originally designed as CNG vehicles, with the rest 
being gasoline-fuelled vehicles that have been converted to operate 
with CNG (Chala et al. 2018).Natural gas-based vehicles have certain advantages over 
conventional fuel-powered ICE vehicles, including lower emissions 
of criteria air pollutants, no soot or particulate, low carbon to 
Hydrogen ratio, moderate noise, a wide range of flammability limits, 
and high octane numbers (Kim 2019; Bayat and Ghazikhani 2020). 
Furthermore, the technology readiness level (TRL) of natural gas 
vehicles is very high (TRL 8–9), with direct modification of existing 
gasoline and diesel vehicles possible (Transport and Environment 
2018; Peters et al. 2021; Sahoo and Srivastava 2021). On the other 
hand, methane emissions from the natural gas supply chain and 
tailpipe CO 2 emissions remain a  significant concern (Trivedi et  al. 
2020). As a result, natural gas as a transition transportation fuel may 
be limited due to better alternative options being available and due 
to regulatory pressure to decarbonise the transport sector rapidly. 
For example, the International Maritime Office (IMO) has set a target 
of 40% less carbon intensity in shipping by 2030, which cannot be 
obtained by simply switching to natural gas.
Biofuels. Since AR5, the faster than anticipated adoption of 
electromobility, primarily for LDVs, has partially shifted the 
debate around the primary use of biofuels from land transport to 
the shipping and aviation sectors (IEA 2017a; Davis et  al. 2018). 
At the same time, other studies highlight that biofuels may have 
to complement electromobility in road transport, particularly in 
developing countries, offering relevant mitigation opportunities 
in the short- and mid-term (up to 2050) (IEA 2021b). An important 
advantage of biofuels is that they can be converted into energy 
carriers compatible with existing technologies, including current 
powertrains and fuel infrastructure. Also, biofuels can diversify 
the supply of transport fuel, raise energy self-sufficiency in many 
countries, and be used as a strategy to diversify and strengthen the 
agro-industrial sector (Puricelli et al. 2021). The use of biofuels as 
a mitigation strategy is driven by a combination of factors, including 
not only the costs and technology readiness levels of the different 
biofuel conversion technologies, but also the availability and costs 
of both biomass feedstocks and alternative mitigation options, 
and the relative speed and scale of the energy transition in energy 
and transport sectors (Box 10.2).
Many studies have addressed the lifecycle emissions of biofuel 
conversion pathways for land transport, aviation, and marine 
applications (Koeble et  al. 2017; Staples et  al. 2018; Tanzer et  al. 
2019). Bioenergy technologies generally struggle to compete with 
existing fossil fuel-based ones because of the higher costs involved. 
However, the extent of the cost gap depends critically on the 
availability and costs of biomass feedstock (IEA 2021b). Ethanol from 
corn and sugarcane is commercially available in countries such as 
Brazil and the US. Biodiesel from oil crops and hydro-processed esters 
and fatty acids are available in various countries, notably in Europe 
and parts of Southeast Asia. On the infrastructure side, biomethane 
blending is being implemented in some regions of the US and Europe, 
particularly in Germany, with the help of policy measures (IEA 2021b). 
While many of these biofuel conversion technologies could also be 
implemented using seaweed feedstock options, these value chains 
are not yet mature (Jiang et al. 2016).Table 10.4 | Engine technologies to reduce emissions from light-duty ICE 
vehicles and their implementation stage.  Table nomenclature: GDI = Gasoline 
direct injection, VVT = Variable valve technology, CDA = Cylinder deactivation, 
CR  =  compression ratio, GDCI = Gasoline direct injection compression ignition, 
EGR = exhaust gas recirculation, RCCI = Reactivity controlled compression ignition, 
GCI = Gasoline compression ignition. Source: Joshi (2020).
Implementation 
stageEngine technologyCO2 reduction
(%)
Implemented Baseline: GDI, turbo, stoichiometry 0
DevelopmentAtkinson cycle (+ VVT) 3–5
Dynamic CDA + Mild hybrid or Miller 10–15
Lean-burn GDI 10–20
Variable CR 10
Spark assisted GCI 10
GDCI 15–25
Water injection 5–10
Pre-chamber concepts 15–20
Homogeneous lean 15–20
Dedicated EGR 15–20
2-stroke opposed-piston diesel 25–35
RCCI 20–30
Chapter 10 Transport10
Technologies to produce advanced biofuels from lignocellulosic 
feedstocks have suffered from slow technology development and 
are still struggling to achieve full commercial scale. Their uptake is 
likely to require carbon pricing and/or other regulatory measures, 
such as clean fuel standards in the transport sector or blending 
mandates. Several commercial-scale advanced biofuels projects are 
in development in many parts of the world, encompassing a wide 
selection of technologies and feedstock choices, including carbon 
capture and sequestration (CCS) that supports carbon dioxide 
removal. The success of these projects is vital to moving forward the 
development of advanced biofuels and bringing many of the advanced 
biofuels value chains closer to the market (IEA 2021b). Finally, biofuel 
production and distribution supply chains involve notable transport 
and logistical challenges that need to be overcome (Mawhood et al. 
2016; Skeer et al. 2016; IEA 2017a; Puricelli et al. 2021).Table  10.5 summarises performance data for different biofuel 
technologies, while Figure 10.3 shows the technology readiness levels.
Within the aviation sector, jet fuels produced from biomass resources 
(so-called sustainable aviation fuels, or SAF) could offer significant 
climate mitigation opportunities under the right policy circumstances. 
Despite the growing interest in aviation biofuels, demand and 
production volumes remain negligible compared to conventional 
fossil aviation fuels. Nearly all flights powered by biofuels have used 
fuels derived from vegetable oils and fats, and the blending level of 
biofuels into conventional aviation fuels for testing is up to 50% today 
(Mawhood et al. 2016). To date, only one facility in the US is regularly 
producing sustainable aviation fuels based on waste oil feedstocks. 
The potential to scale up bio-based SAF volumes is severely restricted 
by the lack of low-cost and sustainable feedstock options (Chapter 7). 
Lignocellulosic feedstocks are considered to have great potential for Box 10.2 | Bridging Land Use and Feedstock Conversion Footprints for Biofuels
Under specific conditions, biofuels may represent an important climate mitigation strategy for the transport sector (Daioglou et al. 2020; 
Muratori et al. 2020). Both the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C and the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and  
Land highlighted that biofuels could be associated with climate mitigation co-benefits and adverse side effects to many SDGs. These side 
effects depend on context-specific conditions, including deployment scale, associated land-use changes and agricultural management 
practices (Section 7.4.4 and Box 7.10). There is broad agreement in the literature that the most important factors in determining the 
climate footprint of biofuels are the land use and land-use change characteristics associated with biofuel deployment scenarios (Elshout 
et al. 2015; Daioglou et al. 2020). This issue is covered in more detail in Box 7.1. While the mitigation literature primarily focuses on the 
GHG-related climate forcings, note that land is an integral part of the climate system through multiple geophysical and geochemical 
mechanisms (albedo, evaporation, etc.). For example, Sections 2.2.7 and 7.3.4 in the AR6 WGI report indicate that geophysical aspects 
of historical land-use change outweigh the geochemical effects, leading to a net cooling effect. The land-related carbon footprints of 
biofuels presented in Sections 10.4–10.6 are adopted from Chapter 7 (Section 7.4.4, Box 7, and Figure 7.1). The results show how the 
land-related footprint increases due to an increased outtake of biomass, as estimated with different models that rely on global supply 
scenarios of biomass for energy and fuel of 100 exajoules (EJ). The integrated assessment models and scenarios used include the EMF 

(PM-NGR). These results are combined with both biomass cultivation emission ranges for advanced biofuels aligned with Koeble et al. 
(2017), El Akkari et al. (2018), Jeswani et al. (2020), and Puricelli et al. (2021) and conversion efficiencies and conversion phase emissions 
as described in Table 10.5. The modelled footprints resulting from land-use changes related to delivering 100 EJ of biomass at global 
level are in the range of 3–77 gCO 2-eq per MJ of advanced biofuel (median 38 gCO 2-eq MJ–1) at an aggregate level for Integrated 
Assessment Models (IAMs) and partial models with constant land cover (Daioglou et al. 2020; Rose et al. 2020). The results for partial 
models with natural regrowth are much higher (91–246 CO 2-eq MJ–1 advanced biofuel). The latter ranges may appear in contrast with 
the results from the scenario literature in Section 10.7, where biofuels play a role in many scenarios compatible with low warming 
levels. This contrast is a result of different underlying modelling practices. The general modelling approach used for the scenarios in 
the AR6 database accounts for the land-use change and all other GHG emissions along a given transformation trajectory, enabling 
assessments of the warming level incurred. The results labelled ‘EMF33’ and ‘partial models with constant land cover’ are obtained 
with this modelling approach. The results in the category ‘partial models with natural regrowth’ attribute additional CO 2 emissions to 
the bioenergy system, corresponding to estimated uptake of CO 2 in a counterfactual scenario where land is not used for bioenergy, but 
instead subject to natural vegetation regrowth. While the partial analysis provides insights into the implications of alternative land-use 
strategies, such analysis does not identify the actual emissions of bioenergy production. As a result, the partial analysis is not compatible 
with the identification of warming levels incurred by an individual transformation trajectory, and therefore not aligned with the general 
approach applied for the scenarios in the AR6 database.
More details on land-use change impacts and the potential to deliver the projected demands of biofuels at the global level are further 
addressed in Chapter 7. While, in general, the above results cover most of the variety of GHG range intensities of biofuel options 
presented in the literature, the more specific life cycle assessment (LCA) literature should be consulted when considering specific 
combinations of biomass feedstock and conversion technologies in specific regions.
Transport  Chapter 1010
Table 10.5 | Ranges of efficiency, GHG emissions, and relative costs of selected biofuel conversion technologies for road, marine, and aviation biofuels.
Main application Conversion technologyEnergy efficiency 
of conversionaGHG emissions of conversion 
process (gCO 2-eq per MJ of fuel)bRelative cost of 
conversion process
Road Lignocellulosic ethanol 35%c5dMedium
Road/aviation Gasification and Fischer-Tropsch synthesis 57%e<1dHigh
Road Ethanol from sugar and starch 60–70%f1–31dLow
Road Biodiesel from oil crops 95%g12–30dLow
Marine Upgraded pyrolysis oil 30–61%h1–4hMedium
Aviation/marine Hydro-processed esters and fatty acids 80%i3iMedium
Aviation Alcohol to jet 90%j<1kHigh
Road/marine Biomethane from residues 60%ln/a Low
Marine/aviation Hydrothermal liquefaction 35–69%h<1hHigh
Aviation Sugars to hydrocarbons 65%m15mHigh
Road Gasification and syngas fermentation 40%n30–40nHigh
Notes: a Calculated as liquid fuels output divided by energy in feedstock entering the conversion plant; b GHG emissions here refers only to the conversion process. Impacts form 
the different biomass options are not included here as they are addressed in Chapter 7; c Olofsson et al. (2017); d Koeble et al. (2017); e Simell et al. (2014); f de Souza Dias et al. 
(2015); g Castanheira et al. (2015); h Tanzer et al. (2019); i Klein et al. (2018); j Narula et al. (2017); k de Jong et al. (2017); l Salman et al. (2017); m Moreira et al. (2014); Roy 
et al. (2015); Handler et al. (2016); n Salman et al. (2017); Moreira et al. (2014); Roy et al. (2015); Handler et al. (2016).
Conversion technologyTechnology readiness level (TRL)
Lignocellulosic ethanol
Gasiﬁcation and Fischer-Tropsch synthesis
Ethanol from sugar and starch
Biodiesel from oil crops
Upgraded pyrolysis oil
Hydroprocessed esters and fatty acids
Alcohol to jet
Biomethane from residues
Hydrothermal liqueﬁcation
Sugars to hydrocarbons
Gasiﬁcation and syngas fermentation1–3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Research & Development Pilot Demonstration Commercialisation
Figure 10.3 | Commercialisation status of selected biofuels conversion technologies.  The grey boxes represent the current technology readiness level of each 
conversion technology. Source: based on Mawhood et al. (2016), Skeer et al. (2016), IEA (2017a), and Puricelli et al. (2021).
Chapter 10 Transport10the production of financially competitive bio-based SAF in many 
regions. However, production facilities involve significant capital 
investment and estimated levelised costs are typically more than 
twice the selling price of conventional jet fuel. In some cases (notably 
for vegetable oils), the feedstock price is already higher than that of 
fossil jet fuel (Mawhood et al. 2016). Some promising technological 
routes for producing SAF from lignocellulosic feedstocks are below 
technology readiness level (TRL) 6 (pilot scale), with just a  few 
players involved in the development of these technologies. Although 
it would be physically possible to address the mid-century projections 
for substantial use of biofuels in the aviation sector (according to the 
International Energy Agency (IEA) and other sectoral organisations 
(ICAO 2017)), this fuel deployment scale could only be achieved 
with very large capital investments in bio-based SAF production 
infrastructure, and substantial policy support.
In comparison to the aviation sector, the prospects for technology 
deployment are better in the shipping sector. The advantage 
of shipping fuels is that marine engines have a  much higher 
operational flexibility on a  mix of fuels, and shipping fuels do 
not need to undergo as extensive refining processes as road and 
aviation fuels to be considered drop-in. However, biofuels in marine 
engines have only been tested at an experimental or demonstration 
stage, leaving open the question about the scalability of the 
operations, including logistics issues. Similar to the aviation 
sector, securing a  reliable, sustainable biomass feedstock supply 
and mature processing technologies to produce price-competitive 
biofuels at a large scale remains a challenge for the shipping sector 
(Hsieh and Felby 2017). Other drawbacks include industry concerns 
about oxidation, storage, and microbial stability for less purified 
or more crude biofuels. Assuming that biofuels are technically 
developed and available for the shipping sector in large quantities, 
a  wider initial introduction of biofuels in the sector is likely to 
depend upon increased environmental regulation of particulate 
and GHG emissions. Biofuels may also offer a significant advantage 
in meeting ambitious sulphur emission reduction targets set by 
the sectoral organisations. More extensive use of marine biofuels 
will most likely be first implemented in inner-city waterways, 
inland river freight routes, and coastal green zones. Given the high 
efficiency of the diesel engine, a large-scale switch to a different 
standard marine propulsion method in the near to medium-term 
future seems unlikely. Thus, much of the effort has been placed on 
developing biofuels compatible with diesel engines. So far, biodiesel 
blends look promising, as it is used in land transport. Hydrotreated 
vegetable oil (HVO) is also a  technically good alternative and is 
compatible with current engines and supply chains, while the 
introduction of multifuel engines may open the market for ethanol 
fuels (Hsieh and Felby 2017).
Ammonia. At room temperature and atmospheric pressure, 
ammonia is a colourless gas with a distinct odour. Due to relatively 
mild conditions for liquefaction, ammonia is transferred and stored 
as a liquefied or compressed gas and has been used as an essential 
industrial chemical resource for many products. In addition, since 
ammonia does not contain carbon, it has attracted attention as 
a carbon-neutral fuel that can also improve combustion efficiency (Gill 
et al. 2012). Furthermore, ammonia could also serve as a hydrogen carrier and be used in fuel cells. These characteristics have driven 
increased interest in the low-carbon production of ammonia, which 
would have to be coupled to low-carbon hydrogen production (with 
low-carbon electricity providing the needed energy or with CCS).
For conventional internal combustion engines, the use of ammonia 
remains challenging due to the relatively low burning velocity 
and high ignition temperature. Therefore, Frigo and Gentili (2014) 
have suggested a  dual-fuelled spark ignition engine operated by 
liquid ammonia and hydrogen, where hydrogen is generated from 
ammonia using the thermal energy of exhaust gas. On the other 
hand, the high-octane number of ammonia means good knocking 
resistance of spark ignition engines and is promising for improving 
thermal efficiency. For compression ignition engines, the high-ignition 
temperature of ammonia requires a high compression ratio, causing 
an increase in mechanical friction. Since Gray et  al. (1966), many 
studies have shown that the compression ratio can be reduced by 
mixing ammonia with secondary fuels such as diesel and hydrogen 
with low self-ignition temperatures, as summarised by Dimitriou and 
Javaid (2020). Using a  secondary fuel with a  high cetane number 
and  the adoption of a  suitable fuel injection timing has enabled 
highly efficient combustion of compression ignition engines in 
the dual fuel mode with ammonia ratios up to 95% (Dimitriou 
and Javaid 2020). One major challenge for realising an ammonia-
fuelled engine is the reduction of unburned ammonia, as described 
in Section 6.4.5 (Reiter and Kong 2011). Processes being examined 
include the use of exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) (Pochet et al. 2017) 
and after treatment systems. However, these processes require space, 
which is a constraint for LDVs and air transport but more practical 
for ships. Shipbuilders are developing an ammonia engine based 
on the existing diesel dual-fuel engine to launch a service in 2025 
(Brown 2019; MAN-ES 2019). Ammonia could therefore contribute 
significantly to decarbonisation in the shipping sector (Section 10.6), 
with potential niche applications elsewhere.
Synthetic fuels. Synthetic fuels can contribute to transport 
decarbonisation through synthesis from electrolytic hydrogen 
produced with low-carbon electricity or hydrogen produced with 
CCS, and captured CO2 using the Fischer-Tropsch process (Liu et al. 
2020a). Due to similar properties of synthetic fuels to those of fossil 
fuels, synthetic fuels can reduce GHG emissions in both existing 
and new vehicles without significant changes to the engine design.  
While the Fischer-Tropsch process is a well-established technology 
(Liu et  al. 2020a), low-carbon synthetic fuel production is still at 
the demonstration stage. Even though their production costs are 
expected to decline in the future due to lower renewable electricity 
prices, increased scale of production, and learning effects, synthetic 
fuels are still up to three times more expensive than conventional 
fossil fuels (Section  6.6.2.4). Furthermore, since the production 
of synthetic fuels involves thermodynamic conversion loss, there 
is a concern that the total energy efficiency is lower than that of 
electric vehicles (Yugo and Soler 2019). Given these high costs and 
limited scales, the adoption of synthetic fuels will likely focus on 
the aviation, shipping, and long-distance road transport segments, 
where decarbonisation by electrification is more challenging. In 
particular, synthetic fuels are considered promising as an aviation 
fuel (Section 10.5).
Transport  Chapter 1010
10.3.2 Electric Technologies
Widespread electrification of the transport sector is likely crucial for 
reducing transport emissions and depends on appropriate electrical 
energy storage systems (EES). However, large-scale diffusion of EES 
depends on improvements in energy density (energy stored per unit 
volume), specific energy (energy stored per unit weight), and costs 
(Cano et al. 2018). Recent trends suggest EES-enabled vehicles are 
on a path to becoming the leading technology for LDVs, but their 
contribution to heavy-duty freight is more uncertain.
Electrochemical storage of light and medium-duty vehicles. 
Electrochemical storage, i.e., batteries, are one of the most promising 
forms of energy storage for the transport sector and have dramatically 
improved in their commerciality since AR5. Rechargeable batteries 
are of primary interest for applications within the transport sector, 
with a range of mature and emerging chemistries able to support 
the electrification of vehicles. The most significant change since 
AR5 and SPR1.5 is the dramatic rise in lithium-ion batteries (LIB), 
which has enabled electromobility to become a  major feature 
of decarbonisation.
Before the recent growth in market share of LIBs, lead-acid batteries, 
nickel batteries, high-temperature sodium batteries, and redox 
flow batteries were of particular interest for the transport sector 
(Placke et  al. 2017). Due to their low costs, lead-acid batteries 
have been used in smaller automotive vehicles, e.g.,  e-scooters 
and e-rickshaws (Dhar et  al. 2017). However, their application 
in electric vehicles will be limited due to their low specific energy 
(Andwari et  al. 2017). Nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries have 
a better energy density than lead-acid batteries and have been well 
optimised for regenerative braking (Cano et  al. 2018). As a  result, 
NiMH batteries were the battery of choice for hybrid electric vehicles 
(HEVs). Ni-Cadmium (NiCd) batteries have energy densities lower 
than NiMH batteries and cost around ten times more than lead-acid 
batteries (Table  6.5). For this reason, NiCd batteries do not have 
major prospects within automotive applications. There are also no 
examples of high-temperature sodium or redox flow batteries being 
used within automotive applications.
Commercial application of LIBs in automotive applications started 
around 2000 when the price of LIBs was more than USD1000 per kWh 
(Schmidt et al. 2017). By 2020, the battery manufacturing capacity 
for automotive applications was around 300 GWh per  year (IEA 
2021a). Furthermore, by 2020, the average battery pack cost had 
come down to USD137 per kWh, a reduction of 89% in real terms 
since 2010 (Henze 2020). Further improvements in specific energy, 
energy density (Nykvist et al. 2015; Placke et al. 2017) and battery 
service life (Liu et al. 2017) of LIBs are expected through additional 
design optimisation (Table  6.5). These advances are expected to 
lead to EVs with even longer driving ranges, further supporting the 
uptake of LIBs for transport applications (Cano et al. 2018). However, 
the performance of LIBs under freezing and high temperatures is 
a concern (Liu et al. 2017) for reliability. Auto manufacturers have 
some pre-heating systems for batteries to see that they perform well 
in very cold conditions (Wu et al. 2020).For EVs sold in 2018, the material demand was about 11 kilotonnes (kt) 
of optimised lithium, 15 kt of cobalt, 11 kt of manganese, and 34 kt 
of nickel (IEA 2019a; IEA 2021a). IEA projections for 2030 in the EV 
30@30 scenario show that the demand for these materials would 
increase by 30 times for lithium and around 25 times for cobalt. While 
there are efforts to move away from expensive materials such as 
cobalt (IEA 2019a; IEA 2021a), dependence on lithium will remain, 
which may be a  cause of concern (Olivetti et  al. 2017; You and 
Manthiram 2018). A more detailed discussion on resource constraints 
for lithium is provided in Box 10.6.
Externalities from resource extraction are another concern, though 
current volumes of lithium are much smaller than other metals (steel, 
aluminium). As a result, lithium was not even mentioned in UNEP’s 
global resource outlook (IRP 2019). Nonetheless, it is essential to 
manage demand and limit externalities since the demand for lithium 
is going to increase many times in the future. Reuse of LIBs used 
in EVs for stationary energy applications can help in reducing the 
demand for LIBs. However, the main challenges are the difficulty in 
accessing the information on the health of batteries to be recycled 
and technical problems in remanufacturing the batteries for their 
second life (Ahmadi et al. 2017). Recycling lithium from used batteries 
could be another possible supply source (Winslow et al. 2018). While 
further R&D is required for commercialisation (Ling et  al., 2018), 
recent efforts at recycling LIBs are very encouraging (Ma et al. 2021). 
The standardisation of battery modules and packaging within and 
across vehicle platforms, increased focus on design for recyclability, 
and supportive regulation are important to enable higher recycling 
rates for LIBs (Harper et al. 2019).
Several next-generation battery chemistries are often referred to 
as post-LIBs (Placke et  al. 2017). These chemistries include metal-
sulphur, metal-air, metal-ion (besides Li), and all-solid-state batteries. 
The long development cycles of the automotive industry (Cano et al. 
2018) and the advantages of LIBs in terms of energy density and cycle 
life (Table 6.5) mean that it is unlikely that post-LIB technologies will 
replace LIBs in the next decade. However, lithium-sulphur, lithium-air, 
and zinc-air have emerged as potential alternatives for LIBs. These 
emerging chemistries may also be used to supplement LIBs in dual-
battery configurations, to extend the driving range at lower costs 
or with higher energy density (Cano et  al. 2018). Lithium-sulphur 
(Li-S) batteries have a lithium metal anode with a higher theoretical 
capacity than lithium-ion anodes and much lower-cost sulphur 
cathodes relative to typical Li-ion insertion cathodes (Manthiram 
et  al. 2014). As a  result, Li-S batteries are much cheaper than LIB 
to manufacture and have a  higher energy density (Table  6.5). 
Conversely, these batteries face challenges from sulphur cathodes, 
such as low conductivity of the sulphur and lithium sulphide phases, 
and the relatively high solubility of sulphur species in common 
lithium battery electrolytes, leading to low cycle life (Cano et  al. 
2018). Lithium-air batteries offer a further improvement in specific 
energy and energy density above Li–S batteries owing to their use 
of atmospheric oxygen as a cathode in place of sulphur. However, 
their demonstrated cycle life is much lower (Table 6.5). Lithium-air 
batteries also have low specific power. Therefore, lithium-air require 
an extra battery for practical applications (Cano et al. 2018). Finally, 
zinc–air batteries could more likely be used in future EVs because 
Chapter 10 Transport10of their more advanced technology status and higher practically 
achievable energy density (Fu et al. 2017). Like Li-air batteries, their 
poor specific power and energy efficiency will probably prevent zinc-
air batteries from being used as a primary energy source for EVs. Still, 
they could be promising when used in a dual-battery configuration 
(Cano et al. 2018).
The technological readiness of batteries is a crucial parameter in the 
advancement of EVs (Manzetti and Mariasiu 2015). Energy density, 
power density, cycle life, calendar life, and the cost per kWh are the 
pertinent parameters for comparing the technological readiness of 
various battery technologies (Manzetti and Mariasiu 2015; Andwari 
et al. 2017; Lajunen et al. 2018). Table 6.5 provides a summary of 
the values of these parameters for alternative battery technologies. 
LIBs comprehensively dominate the other battery types and are 
at a readiness level where they can be applied for land transport 
applications (cars, scooters, electrically-assisted cycles) and at 
battery pack costs below USD150 per  kWh, making EVs cost-
competitive with conventional vehicles (Nykvist et al. 2019). In 2020 
the stock of battery electric LDVs had crossed the 10 million mark 
(IEA 2021a). Schmidt et al. (2017) project that the cost of a battery 
pack for LIBs will reach USD100 per kWh by 2030, but more recent 
trends show this could happen much earlier. For example, according 
to IEA, battery pack costs could be as low as USD80 per kWh by 

vehicle manufacturers are offering vehicles with bigger batteries, 
greater driving ranges, higher top speeds, faster acceleration, and 
all size categories (Nykvist et  al. 2019). In 2020 there were over 
600,000 battery electric buses and over 31,000 battery electric 
trucks operating globally (IEA 2021a).
LIBs are not currently envisaged to be suitable for long-haul transport. 
However, several battery technologies are under development 
(Table 6.5), which could further enhance the competitiveness of EVs 
and expand their applicability to very short-haul aviation and ships, 
especially smaller vehicles. Li-S, Li-air, and Zn-air hold the highest 
potential for these segments (Cano et al. 2018). All three of these 
technologies rely on making use of relatively inexpensive elements, 
which can help bring down battery costs (Cano et  al. 2018). The 
main challenge these technologies face is in terms of the cycle 
life. Out of the three, Li-S has already been used for applications in 
unmanned aerial vehicles (Fotouhi et al., 2017) due to relatively high 
specific energy (almost double the state of the art LIBs). However, 
even with low cycle life, Li-air and Zn-air hold good prospects for 
commercialisation as range extender batteries for long-range road 
transport and with vehicles that are typically used for city driving 
(Cano et al. 2018).
Alternative electricity storage technologies for heavy-duty 
transport. While LIBs described in the previous section are driving the 
electrification of LDVs, their application to railways, aviation, ships, and 
large vehicles faces challenges due to the higher power requirements 
of these applications. The use of a  capacitor with a  higher power density 
than LIBs could be suitable for the electrification of such vehicles. 
It is one of the solutions for regenerating large and instantaneous 
energy from regenerative brakes. Classical capacitors generally show 
more attractive characteristics in power density (8000–10,000 watts per kilogram (W/kg)) than batteries. However, the energy density is 
poor (1–4 watt-hours per kilogram (Wh/kg)) compared to batteries, 
and there is an issue of self-discharge (González et al. 2016; Poonam 
et al. 2019). To improve the energy density, electrochemical double 
layer capacitors (EDLCs; supercapacitor) and hybrid capacitors 
(10–24 Wh/kg, 900–9000 W/kg at the product level) such as Li-ion 
capacitors have been developed. The highest energy density of the 
LIC system (100–140 Wh/kg in the research stage) are approaching 
that of the Li-ion battery systems (80–240 Wh/kg in the product 
stage) (Naoi et  al. 2012; Panja et  al. 2020). Examples of effective 
use of capacitors include a  12-tonne truck with a  capacitor-based 
kinetic energy recovery system that has been reported to save up 
to 32% of the fuel use of a standard truck (Kamdar 2017). Similarly, 
an EDLC bank applied to electric railway systems has been shown to 
result in a 10% reduction in power consumption per day (Takahashi 
et al. 2017). Finally, systems in which capacitors are mounted on an 
electric bus for charging at a stop have been put into practical use, 
for example by a trackless tram (Newman et al. 2019). At the bus 
stop, the capacitor is charged at 600 kW for 10 about 40 seconds, 
which provides enough power for about 5 to 10 km (Newman et al. 
2019). In addition, more durable capacitors can achieve a longer life 
than LIB systems (ADB 2018).
Hybrid energy storage (HES) systems, which combine a  capacitor 
and a  battery, achieve both high power and high energy, solving 
problems such as capacity loss of the battery and self-discharge of 
the capacitor. In these systems, the capacitor absorbs the steeper 
power, while the LIB handles the steady power, thereby reducing the 
power loss of the EV to half. Furthermore, since the in-rush current of 
the battery is suppressed, there is an improvement in the reliability 
of the LIB (Noumi et al. 2014). In a hybrid diesel train, 8.2% of the 
regenerative energy is lost due to batteries’ limited charge-discharge 
performance; however, using an EDLC with batteries can save this 
energy (Takahashi et al. 2017; Mayrink et al. 2020).
The development of power storage devices and advanced 
integrated system approaches, including power electronics circuits 
such as HES and their control technologies, are important for the 
electrification of mobility. These technologies are solutions that 
could promote the electrification of systems, reduce costs, and 
contribute to the social environment through multiple outcomes in 
the decarbonisation agenda.
10.3.3 Fuel Cell Technologies
In harder-to-electrify transport segments, such as heavy-duty 
vehicles, shipping, and aviation, hydrogen holds significant promise 
for delivering emissions reductions if it is produced using low-carbon 
energy sources. In particular, hydrogen fuel cells are seen as an 
emerging option to power larger vehicles for land-based transport 
(Tokimatsu et al. 2016; IPCC 2018; IEA 2019b). Despite this potential, 
further advancements in technological and economic maturity will 
be required in order for hydrogen fuel cells to play a greater role. 
While this section focuses primarily on hydrogen fuel cells, ammonia 
and methanol fuel cells may also emerge as options for low 
power applications.
Transport  Chapter 1010
During the last decade, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles (HFCVs) have 
attracted growing attention, with fuel cell technology improving 
through research and development. Fuel cell systems cost 80% 
to 95% less than they did in the early 2000s, at approximately 
USD50 per kW for light-duty (80 kW) and $100 per kW for medium-
heavy-duty (160 kW). These costs are approaching the US Department 
of Energy’s (US DOE) goal of USD40 per kW in 2025 at a production 
target of 500,000 systems per year (IEA 2019c). In addition to cost 
reductions, the power density of fuel cell stacks has now reached 
around 3.0 kilowatt per  litre (kW/l) and average durability has 
improved to approximately 2000 to 3000 hours (Jouin et al. 2016; 
Kurtz et al. 2019). Despite these improvements, fuel cell systems are 
not yet mature for many commercial applications. For example, the 
US DOE has outlined that for hydrogen fuel cell articulated trucks 
(semi-trailers) to compete with diesel vehicles, fuel cell durability 
will need to reach 30,000 hours (US DOE 2019). While some fuel cell 
buses have demonstrated durability close to these targets (Eudy and 
Post 2018a), another review of light fuel cell vehicles found maximum 
durability of 4000 hours (Kurtz et al. 2019). As more fuel cell vehicles 
are trialled, it is expected that further real-world data will become 
available to track ongoing fuel cell durability improvements.
Ammonia and methanol fuel cells are considered to be less mature 
than hydrogen fuel cells. However, they offer the benefit of using 
a  more easily transported fuel that can be directly used without 
converting to hydrogen (Zhao et al. 2019). Conversely, both methanol 
and ammonia are toxic, and in the case of methanol fuel cells, carbon 
dioxide is released as a by-product of generating electricity with the 
fuel cell (Zhao et al. 2019). Due to the lower power output, methanol 
and ammonia fuel cells are also not well suited to heavy-duty 
vehicles (Jeerh et al. 2021). They are therefore unlikely to compete 
with hydrogen fuel cells. However, ammonia and methanol could 
be converted to hydrogen at refuelling stations as an alternative to 
being directly used in fuel cells (Zhao et al. 2019).
Several FCV-related technologies are fully ready for demonstration 
and early market deployment, however, further research and 
development will be required to achieve full-scale commercialisation, 
likely from 2030 onwards (Staffell et  al. 2019; Energy Transitions 
Commission 2020; IEA 2021b). Some reports argue that it may be 
possible to achieve serial production of fuel cell heavy-duty trucks 
in the late 2020s, with comparable costs to diesel vehicles achieved 
after 2030 (Jordbakker et  al. 2018). Over the next decade or so, 
hydrogen FCVs could become cost-competitive for various transport 
applications, potentially including long-haul trucks, marine ships, 
and aviation (Hydrogen Council 2017; FCHEA 2019; FCHJU 2019; 
BloombergNEF 2020; Hydrogen Council 2020). The speed of fuel 
cell system cost reduction is a key factor for achieving widespread 
uptake. Yet, experts disagree on the relationship between the scale of 
fuel cell demand, cost, and performance improvements (Cano et al. 
2018). Costs of light-, medium-, and heavy-duty fuel cell powertrains 
have decreased by orders of magnitude with further reductions of 
a  factor of two expected with continued technological progress 
(Whiston et al. 2019). For example, the costs of platinum for fuel cell 
stacks have decreased by an order of magnitude (Staffell et al. 2019); 
current generation FCVs use approximately 0.25 g/kW platinum and 
a further reduction of 50–80% is expected by 2030 (Hao et al. 2019).Hydrogen is likely to take diverse roles in the future energy system: 
as a fuel in industry and buildings, as well as transport, and as energy 
storage for variable renewable electricity. Further research is required 
to understand better how a hydrogen transport fuel supply system 
fits within the larger hydrogen energy system, especially in terms of 
integration within existing infrastructure, such as the electricity grid 
and the natural gas pipeline system (IEA 2015).
Strong and durable policies would be needed to enable widespread 
use of hydrogen as a  transport fuel and to sustain momentum 
during a  multi-decade transition period for hydrogen FCVs to 
become cost-competitive with electric vehicles (Hydrogen Council 
2017; FCHEA 2019; FCHJU 2019; IEA 2019c; BNEF 2020; Hydrogen 
Council 2020). The analysis suggests that hydrogen is likely to have 
strategic and niche roles in transport, particularly in long-haul 
shipping and aviation. With continuing improvements, hydrogen and 
electrification will likely play a role in decarbonising heavy-duty road 
and rail vehicles.
10.3.4 Refuelling and Charging Infrastructure
The transport sector relies on liquid gasoline, and diesel for land-
based transport, jet fuel for aviation, and heavy fuel oil for shipping. 
Extensive infrastructure for refuelling liquid fossil fuels already 
exists. Ammonia, synthetic fuels, and biofuels have emerged as 
alternative fuels for powering combustion engines and turbines 
used in land, shipping, and aviation (Figure  10.2). Synthetic fuels 
such as e-methanol and Fischer-Tropsch liquids have similar physical 
properties and could be used with existing fossil fuel infrastructure 
(Yugo and Soler, 2019). Similarly, biofuels have been used in several 
countries together with fossil fuels (Panoutsou et al. 2021). Ammonia 
is a  liquid, but only under pressure, and therefore will not be 
compatible with liquid fossil fuel refuelling infrastructure. Ammonia 
is, however, widely used as a fertiliser and chemical raw material and 
10% of annual ammonia production is transported via sea (Gallucci 
2021). As such, a number of port facilities include ammonia storage 
and transport infrastructure and the shipping industry has experience 
in handling ammonia (Gallucci 2021). This infrastructure would likely 
need to be extended in order to support the use of ammonia as a fuel 
for shipping and therefore ports are likely to be the primary sites for 
these new refuelling facilities.
EVs and HFCV require separate infrastructure than liquid fuels. The 
successful diffusion of new vehicle technologies is dependent on 
the preceding deployment of infrastructure (Leibowicz 2018), so that 
the deployment of new charging and refuelling infrastructure will be 
critical for supporting the uptake of emerging transport technologies 
like EVs and HFCVs, where it makes sense for each to be deployed. 
As a result, there is likely a need for simultaneous investment in both 
infrastructure and vehicle technologies to accelerate decarbonisation 
of the transport sector.
Charging infrastructure. Charging infrastructure is important 
for a number of key reasons. From a consumer perspective, robust 
and reliable charging infrastructure networks are required to build 
confidence in the technology and overcome the often-cited barrier of 
Chapter 10 Transport10‘range anxiety’ (She et al. 2017). Range anxiety is where consumers 
do not have confidence that an EV will meet their driving range 
requirements. For LDVs, the majority of charging (75–90%) has been 
reported to take place at or near homes (Figenbaum 2017; Webb 
et al. 2019; Wenig et al. 2019). Charging at home is a particularly 
significant factor in the adoption of EVs as consumers are less willing 
to purchase an EV without home charging (Berkeley et al. 2017; Funke 
and Plötz 2017; Nicholas et al. 2017). However, home charging may 
not be an option for all consumers. For example, apartment dwellers 
may face specific challenges in installing charging infrastructure 
(Hall and Lutsey 2020). Thus, the provision of public charging 
infrastructure is another avenue for alleviating range anxiety, 
facilitating longer distance travel in EVs, and in turn, encouraging 
adoption (Hall and Lutsey 2017; Melliger et al. 2018; Narassimhan 
and Johnson 2018; Melton et al. 2020). Currently, approximately 10% 
of charging occurs at public locations, roughly split equally between 
alternating current (AC) (slower) and direct current (DC) (fast) 
charging (Figenbaum 2017; Webb et  al. 2019; Wenig et  al. 2019). 
Deploying charging infrastructure at workplaces and commuter car 
parks is also important, particularly as vehicles are parked at these 
locations for many hours. Indeed, around 15–30% of EV charging 
currently occurs at these locations (Figenbaum 2017; Webb et  al. 
2019; Wenig et al. 2019). It has been suggested that automakers and 
utilities could provide support for the installation of home charging 
infrastructure (Hardman et al. 2018), while policymakers can provide 
support for public charging. Such support could come via supportive 
planning policy, building regulations, and financial support. Policy 
support could also incentivise the deployment of charging stations 
at workplaces and commuter car parks. Charging at these locations 
would have the added benefit of using excess solar energy generated 
during the day (Hardman et al. 2018; Webb et al. 2019).
While charging infrastructure is of high importance for the 
electrification of light-duty vehicles, arguably it is even more 
important for heavy-duty vehicles, given the costs of high-power 
charging infrastructure. It is estimated that the installed cost of fast-
charging hardware can vary between approximately USD45,000 
to USD200,000 per  charger, depending on the charging rate, the 
number of chargers per  site, and other site conditions (Hall and 
Lutsey 2019; Nelder and Rogers 2019; Nicholas 2019). Deployment 
of shared charging infrastructure at key transport hubs, such as bus 
and truck depots, freight distribution centres, marine shipping ports 
and airports, can encourage a transition to electric vehicles across 
the heavy transport segments. Furthermore, if charging infrastructure 
sites are designed to cater for both light- and heavy-duty vehicles, 
infrastructure costs could decrease by increasing utilisation across 
multiple applications and/or fleets (Nelder and Rogers 2019).
There are two types of charging infrastructure for electric vehicles: 
conductive charging involving a  physical connection and wireless/
induction charging. The majority of charging infrastructure deployed 
today for light- and heavy-duty vehicles is conductive. However, 
wireless charging technologies are beginning to emerge – particularly 
for applications like bus rapid transit – with vehicles able to charge 
autonomously while parked and/or in motion (IRENA 2019). For 
road vehicles, electric road systems, or road electrification, is also 
emerging as an alternative form of conductive charging infrastructure that replaces a physical plug (Ainalis et al. 2020; Hill et al. 2020). 
This type of charging infrastructure is particularly relevant for road 
freight where load demand is higher. Road electrification can take 
the form of a charging rail built into the road pavement, run along 
the side of the road, through overhead catenary power lines – similar 
to electrical infrastructure used for rail – or at recharging facilities 
at stations along the route. This infrastructure can also be used to 
directly power other electrified powertrains, such as hybrid and HFCV 
(Hardman et al. 2018; Hill et al. 2020).
Charging infrastructure also varies in terms of the level of charging 
power. For light vehicles, charging infrastructure is generally up to 


charging infrastructure is generally up to 600 kW, providing around 
50–100 km for every 10 minutes of charging (depending on the size 
of the vehicle). Finally, even higher-power charging infrastructure is 
currently being developed at rates greater than 1 MW, particularly 
for long-haul trucks and for short-haul marine shipping and 
aviation. For example, one of the largest electric ferries in the world, 
currently operating in Denmark, uses a 4.4 MW charger (Heinemann 
et al. 2020).
Finally, there are several different charging standards, varying across 
transport segments and across geographical locations. Like electrical 
appliances, different EV charging connectors and sockets have 
emerged in different regions, such as CCS2 in Europe (ECA 2021), 
GB/T in China (Hove and Sandalow 2019). Achieving interoperability 
between charging stations is seen as another important issue for 
policymakers to address to provide transparent data to the market 
on where EV chargers are located and a  consistent approach to 
paying for charging sessions (van der Kam and Bekkers 2020). 
Interoperability could also play an important role in enabling smart 
charging infrastructure (Neaimeh and Andersen 2020).
Smart charging: electric vehicle-grid integration strategies. 
EVs provide several opportunities for supporting electricity grids 
if appropriately integrated. Conversely, a  lack of integration could 
negatively affect the grid, particularly if several vehicles are charged 
in parallel at higher charging rates during peak demand periods 
(Webb et  al. 2019; Jochem et  al. 2021). There are three primary 
approaches to EV charging. In unmanaged charging, EVs are charged 
ad hoc, whenever connected, regardless of conditions on the broader 
electricity grid (Webb et  al. 2019; Jochem et  al. 2021). Second, in 
managed charging, EVs are charged during periods beneficial to 
the grid, e.g., at periods of high renewable generation and/or low 
demand. Managed charging also allows utilities to regulate the rate 
of charge and can thus provide frequency and regulation services to 
the grid (Weis et al. 2014). Finally, in bidirectional charging or vehicle-
to-grid (V2G), EVs are generally subject to managed charging, but an 
extension provides the ability to export electricity from the vehicle’s 
battery back to the building and/or wider electricity grid (Ercan 
et al. 2016; Noel et al. 2019; Jochem et al. 2021). The term ‘smart 
charging’ has become an umbrella term to encompass both managed 
charging  (often referred to as V1G) and V2G. For electric utilities, 
smart charging strategies can provide back-up power, support load 
balancing, reduce peak loads (Zhuk et  al. 2016; Noel  et  al. 2019; 
Transport  Chapter 1010
Jochem et al. 2021), reduce the uncertainty in forecasts of daily and 
hourly electrical loads (Peng et al. 2012), and allow greater utilisation 
of generation capacity (Hajimiragha et  al. 2010; Madzharov 
et al. 2014).
Smart charging strategies can also enhance the climate benefits 
of EVs (Yuan et al. 2021). Controlled charging can help avoid high-
carbon electricity sources, decarbonisation of the ancillary service 
markets, or peak shaving of high-carbon electricity sources (Jochem 
et al. 2021). V2G-capable EVs can result in even lower total emissions, 
particularly when compared to other alternatives (Reddy et al. 2016). 
Noel et  al. (2019) analysed V2G pathways in Denmark and noted 
that at a penetration rate of 75% by 2030, USD34 billion in social 
benefits could be accrued (through things like displaced pollution). 
These social benefits translate to USD1,200 per vehicle. V2G-capable 
EVs were found to have the potential to reduce carbon emissions 
compared to a conventional gasoline vehicle by up to 59%, assuming 
optimised charging schedules (Hoehne and Chester 2016).
Projections of energy storage suggest smart charging strategies will 
come to play a significant role in future energy systems. Assessment 
of different energy storage technologies for Europe showed that V2G 
offered the most storage potential compared to other options and could 
account for 200 GW of installed capacity by 2060, whereas utility-scale 
batteries and pumped hydro storage could provide 160 GW of storage 
capacity (Després et  al. 2017). Another study found that EVs with 
controlled charging could provide similar services to stationary storage 
but at a far lower cost (Coignard et al. 2018). While most deployments 
of smart charging strategies are still at the pilot stage, the number 
of projects continues to expand, with the V2G Hub documenting at 
least 90 V2G projects across 22 countries in 2021 (Vehicle to Grid 
2021). Policymakers have an important role in facilitating collaboration 
between vehicle manufacturers, electricity utilities, infrastructure 
providers, and consumers to enable smart charging strategies and 
ensure EVs can support grid stability and the uptake of renewable 
energy. This is a critical part of decarbonising transport.
Hydrogen infrastructure. HFCVs are reliant on the development 
of widespread and convenient hydrogen refuelling stations 
(FCHEA 2019; IEA 2019c; BNEF 2020). Globally, there are around 

America, Europe, Japan, and China (IEA 2021a). Approximately 70% 
of these refuelling stations are open to the public (Coignard et al. 
2018). Typical refuelling stations currently have a refuelling capacity 
of 100 to 350 kg/day (CARB 2019; CARB 2020; H2 Tools 2020; AFDC 
2021). At most, current hydrogen refuelling stations have daily 
capacities under 500 kg a day (Liu et al. 2020b).
The design of hydrogen refuelling stations depends on the choice of 
methods for hydrogen supply and delivery, compression and storage, and the dispensing strategy. Hydrogen supply could happen via on-
site production or via transport and delivery of hydrogen produced 
off-site. At the compression stage, hydrogen is compressed to achieve 
the pressure needed for economic stationary and vehicle storage. This 
pressure depends on the storage strategy. Hydrogen can be stored 
as a liquid or a gas. Hydrogen can also be dispensed to vehicles as 
a gas or a liquid, depending on the design of the vehicles (though it 
tests the extremes of temperature range and storage capacity for an 
industrial product). The technological and economic development of 
each of these components continues to be researched.
If hydrogen is produced off site in a large centralised plant, it must 
be stored and delivered to refuelling stations. The cost of hydrogen 
delivery depends on the amount of hydrogen delivered, the delivery 
distance, the storage method (compressed gas or cryogenic 
liquid), and the delivery mode (truck or pipeline). Table  10.6 
describes the three primary options for hydrogen delivery. Most 
hydrogen refuelling stations today are supplied by trucks and, very 
occasionally, hydrogen pipelines. Gaseous tube trailers could also be 
used to deliver hydrogen in the near term, or over shorter distances, 
due to the low fixed cost (although the variable cost is high). Both 
liquefied truck trailers and pipelines are recognised as options in 
the medium to long term as they have higher capacities and lower 
costs over longer distances (FCHJU 2019; Li et al. 2020; EU 2021). 
Alternatively, hydrogen can be produced on site using a small-scale 
on-site electrolyser or steam methane reforming unit combined with 
CCS. Hydrogen is generally dispensed to vehicles as a compressed 
gas at pressures 350 or 700 bar, or as liquified hydrogen at –253°C 
(Hydrogen Council 2020).
The costs for hydrogen refuelling stations vary widely and remain 
uncertain for the future (IEA 2019c). The IEA reports that the 
investment cost for one hydrogen refuelling station ranges between 
USD0.6 million and USD2 million for hydrogen at a  pressure of 

cost of hydrogen refuelling stations with lower refuelling capacities 
(~50  kg  H2 per  day) delivered at lower pressure (350 bar) range 
between USD0.15–1.6  million. A  separate estimate by the 
International Council for Clean Transport suggests that at a capacity 
of 600 kg of hydrogen per day, the capital cost of a single refuelling 
station would be approximately USD1.8 million (ICCT 2017). Given 
the high investment costs for hydrogen refuelling stations, low 
utilisation can translate into a high price for delivered hydrogen. In 
Europe, most pumps operate at less than 10% capacity. For small 
refuelling stations with a capacity of 50 kg H 2 per day, this utilisation 
rate translates to a high price of around USD15–25 per kg H 2 – in 
line with current retail prices (IEA 2019c). The dispensed cost of 
hydrogen is also highly correlated with the cost of electricity, when 
H2 is produced using electrolysis, which is required to produce low-
carbon hydrogen.
Table 10.6 | Overview of three transport technologies for hydrogen delivery in the transport sector showing relative differences.  Source: IEA (2019c).
Capacity Delivery distance Energy loss Fixed costs Variable costs Deployment phase
Gaseous tube trailers Low Low Low Low High Near term
Liquefied truck trailers Medium High High Medium Medium Medium to long term
Hydrogen pipelines High High Low High Low Medium to long term
Chapter 10 Transport1010.4 Decarbonisation of Land-based Transport
10.4.1 Light-duty Vehicles for Passenger Transport
LDVs represent the main mode of transport for private citizens 
(ITF 2019) and currently represent the largest share of transport 
emissions globally (IEA 2019d). Currently, powertrains depending 
on gasoline and diesel fuels remain the dominant technology in the 
LDV segment (IEA 2019d). HEVs, and fully battery electric vehicles 
(BEVs), however, have become increasingly popular in recent years 
(IEA 2021a). Correspondingly, the number of lifecycle assessment 
(LCA) studies investigating HEVs, BEVs, and fuel cell vehicles have 
increased. While historically the focus has been on the tailpipe 
emissions of LDVs, LCA studies demonstrate the importance of 
including emissions from the entire vehicle value chain, particularly 
for alternative powertrain technologies.
Figure 10.4 presents the cumulative lifecycle emissions for selected 
powertrain technologies and fuel chain combinations for compact 
and mid-sized LDVs. This figure summarises the harmonised findings 
from the academic literature reviewed and the data submitted 
through an IPCC data collection effort, as described in Appendix 10.1 
(Hawkins et al. 2013; Messagie et al. 2014; Bauer et al. 2015; Tong 
et al. 2015b; Ellingsen et al. 2016; Gao et al. 2016; Kim and Wallington 
2016; Cai et al. 2017; Evangelisti et al. 2017; Ke et al. 2017; Lombardi 
et al. 2017; Miotti et al. 2017; Valente et al. 2017; Cox et al. 2018; 
de Souza et al. 2018; Elgowainy et al. 2018; Luk et al. 2018; Bekel 
and Pauliuk 2019; Cusenza et al. 2019; Hoque et al. 2019; IEA 2019a; 
Rosenfeld et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019; Wu et al. 
2019; Ambrose et  al. 2020; Benajes et  al. 2020; Hill et  al. 2020; 
Knobloch et al. 2020; Prussi et al. 2020; Qiao et al. 2020; Wolfram 
et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2020; Sacchi 2021; Valente et al. 2021). The 
values in the figure (and the remaining figures in this section) depend 
on the 100-year global warming potential (GWP) used in each study, 
which may differ from the recent GWP updates from WGI. However, 
it is unlikely that the qualitative insights gained from the figures in 
this section would change using the update 100-year GWP values.
Furthermore, note that the carbon footprint of biofuels used in 
Figure  10.4 are aggregate numbers not specific to any individual 
value chain or fuel type. They are derived by combining land use-
related carbon emissions from Chapter 7 with conversion efficiencies 
and emissions as described in Section  10.3. Specifically, land-use 
footprints derived from the three modelling approaches employed 
here are: i) Integrated Assessment Models  – Energy Modelling 
Forum 33 (IAM EMF33); ii) Partial models assuming constant land 
cover (CLC), and, iii) Partial models using natural regrowth (NRG). The 
emissions factors used here correspond to scenarios where global 
production of biomass for energy purposes are 100 EJ/year, with 
lower emissions factors expected at lower levels of consumption and 
vice versa. Further details are available in Box 10.2 and Chapter 7.
The tailpipe emissions and fuel consumption reported in the literature 
generally do not use empirical emissions data. Rather, they tend to 
report fuel efficiency using driving cycles such as New European 
Driving Cycle or the US Environmental Protection Agency Federal Test 
Procedure. As a result, depending on the driving cycle used, operating emissions reported in literature are possibly underestimated by as 
much as 15–38%, in comparison to real driving emissions (Fontaras 
et  al. 2017; Tsiakmakis et  al. 2017; Triantafyllopoulos et  al. 2019). 
The extent of these underestimations, however, varies between 
powertrain types, engine sizes, driving behaviour and environment.
Current average lifecycle impacts of mid-size ICEVs span from 
approximately 65 gCO 2-eq pkm–1 to 210 gCO 2-eq pkm–1, with 
both values stemming from ICEVs running on biofuels. Between 
this range of values, the current reference technologies are found, 
with diesel-powered ICEVs having total median lifecycle impacts of 

Fuel consumption dominates the lifecycle emissions of ICEVs, with 
approximately 75% of these emissions arising from the tailpipe and 
fuel chain.
HEVs and plug-in HEVs (PHEVs) vary in terms of degree of powertrain 
electrification. HEVs mainly rely on regenerative braking for charging 
the battery. PHEVs combine regenerative braking with external 
power sources for charging the battery. Operating emissions intensity 
is highly dependent on the degree to which electrified driving is 
performed, which in turn is user- and route-dependent. For PHEVs, 
emissions intensity is also dependent on the source of the electricity 
for charging. HEV and PHEV production impacts are comparable 
to the emissions generated for producing ICEVs as the batteries 
are generally small compared to those of BEVs. Current HEVs may 
reduce emissions compared to ICEVs by up to 30%, depending 
on the fuel, yielding median lifecycle intensities varying between 

(biofuels, partial models NRG). Within this wide range, all the 
combinations of electric and fossil-fuelled driving can be found, 
as well as the lifecycle intensity for driving 100% on fossil fuel. 
Because HEVs rely on combustion as the main energy conversion 
process, they offer limited mitigation opportunities. However, 
HEVs represent a suitable temporary solution, yielding a moderate 
mitigation potential, in areas where the electricity mix is currently so 
carbon intensive that the use of PHEVs and BEVs is not an effective 
mitigation solution (Wolfram and Wiedmann 2017; Wu et al. 2019).
In contrast to HEVs, PHEVs may provide greater opportunities for 
use-phase emissions reductions for LDVs. These increased potential 
benefits are due to the ability to charge the battery with low-carbon 
electricity and the longer full-electric range in comparison to HEVs 
(Laberteaux et  al. 2019). Consumer behaviour (e.g.,  utility factor 
(UF) and charging patterns), manufacturer settings, and access 
to renewable electricity for charging strongly influence the total 
operational impacts (Wu et al. 2019). The UF is a weighting of the 
percentage of distance covered using the electric charge (charge 
depleting (CD) stage) versus the distance covered using the internal 
combustion engine (charge sustaining (CS) stage) (Paffumi et  al. 
2018). When the PHEV operates in CS mode, the internal combustion 
engine is used for propulsion and to maintain the state of charge 
of the battery within a  certain range, together with regenerative 
braking (Plötz et  al. 2018; Raghavan and Tal 2020). When running 
in CS mode, PHEVs have a  reduced mitigation potential and have 
impacts comparable to those of HEVs. On the other hand, when the 
PHEV operates in CD mode, the battery alone provides the required 
Transport  Chapter 1010
Gasoline
Diesel
Compressed natural gas
Liqueﬁed petroleum gas
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
Gasoline
Diesel
Compressed natural gas
Liqueﬁed petroleum gas
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
Low-carbon electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Hydrogen, low-carbon electricity
Hydrogen, natural gas SMR162 [222]


















LegendTransport lifecycle GHG intensity,
1.5 occupancy rate (gCO2-eq per passenger-km)Median well-to-wheel emissions intensity
[median lifecycle GHG emissions intensity] (gCO2-eq per vehicle-km)
Lifecycle GHG intensity (gCO2-eq per vehicle-km)0 67 133 200 267

MedianInterquartiles
Median
95th percentile
Data pointFCV BEV HEV ICEV
Vehicle cycle
emissions intensityLife cycle emissions intensity
(vehicle production + WTW)
lnterquartiles
Figure 10.4 | Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions intensities for mid-sized light-duty vehicle and fuel technologies from the literature.  The primary x-axis 
reports units in gCO 2-eq vkm–1, assuming a vehicle life of 180,000 km. The secondary x-axis uses units of gCO 2-eq pkm–1, assuming a 1.5 occupancy rate. The values in the 
figure rely on the 100-year GWP value embedded in the source data, which may differ slightly from the updated 100-year GWP values from WGI. The shaded area represents 
the interquartile range for combined vehicle manufacturing and end-of-life phases. The length of the box and whiskers represent the interquartile range of the operation phase 
for different fuel chains, while their placement on the x-axis represents the absolute lifecycle climate intensity, that is, includes manufacturing and end-of-life phases. Each 
individual marker indicates a data point. ‘Advanced biofuels’ refers to the use of second-generation biofuels and their respective conversion and cultivation emission factors. 
‘IAM EMF33’ refers to emissions factors for advanced biofuels derived from simulation results from the integrated assessment models EMF33 scenarios. ‘PM’ refers to partial 
models, where ‘CLC’ is with constant land cover and ‘NRG’ is with natural regrowth. ‘Hydrogen, low-carbon electricity’ is produced via electrolysis using low-carbon electricity. 
‘Hydrogen, natural gas SMR’ refers to fuels produced via steam methane reforming of natural gas.
Chapter 10 Transport10propulsion energy (Plötz et al. 2018; Raghavan and Tal 2020). Thus, in 
CD mode, PHEVs hold potential for higher mitigation potential, due 
to the possibility of charging the battery with low-carbon electricity 
sources. Consequently, the UF greatly influences the lifecycle emissions 
of PHEVs. The current peer-reviewed literature presents a wide range 
of UFs mainly due to varying testing protocols applied for estimating 
the fuel efficiency and user behaviour (Pavlovic et al. 2017; Paffumi 
et  al. 2018; Plötz et  al. 2018; Plötz et  al. 2020; Raghavan and Tal 
2020; Hao et al. 2021). These factors make it difficult to harmonise 
and compare impacts across PHEV studies. Due to the low number 
of appropriate PHEV studies relative to the other LDV technologies 
and the complications in harmonising available PHEV results, this 
technology is omitted from Figure  10.4. However, due to the dual 
operating nature of PHEV vehicles, one can expect that the lifecycle 
GHG emissions intensities for these vehicles will lie between those 
of their ICEV and BEV counterparts of similar size and performance.
Currently, BEVs have higher manufacturing emissions than 
equivalently-sized ICEVs, with median emissions of 14 tCO 2-eq 
per  vehicle against approximately 10 tCO 2-eq per  vehicle of their 
mid-sized fossil-fuelled counterparts. These higher production 
emissions of BEVs are largely attributed to the battery pack 
manufacturing and to the additional power electronics required. 
As manufacturing technology and capacity utilisation improve and 
globalise to regions with low-carbon electricity, battery manufacturing 
emissions will likely decrease. Due to the higher energy efficiency 
of the electric powertrain, BEVs may compensate for these higher 
production emissions in the driving phase. However, the mitigation 
ability of this technology relative to ICEVs is highly dependent on 
the electricity mix used to charge the vehicle. As a consequence of 
the  variety of energy sources available today, current BEVs have 
a wide range of potential average lifecycle impacts, ranging between 60 and 180 gCO 2-eq pkm–1 with electricity generated from wind and 
coal, respectively. The ability to achieve large carbon reductions via 
vehicle electrification is thus highly dependent on the generation of 
low-carbon electricity, with the greatest mitigation effects achieved 
when charging the battery with low-carbon electricity. The literature 
suggests that current BEVs, if manufactured on low-carbon electricity 
as well as operated on low-carbon electricity would have footprints 
as low 22 gCO 2-eq pkm–1 for a  compact-sized car (Ellingsen 
et  al. 2014; Ellingsen et  al. 2016). This value suggests a  reduction 
potential of around 85% compared to similarly-sized fossil fuel 
vehicles (median values). Furthermore, BEVs have a  co-benefit of 
reducing local air pollutants that are responsible for human health 
complications, particularly in densely-populated areas (Hawkins et al. 
2013; Ke et al. 2017).
As with BEVs, current HFCVs have higher production emissions than 
similarly-sized ICEVs and BEVs, generating on average approximately 

are highly dependent on the fuel chain. To date, the most common 
method of hydrogen production is steam methane reforming of 
natural gas (Khojasteh Salkuyeh et  al. 2017), which is relatively 
carbon intensive, resulting in lifecycle emissions of approximately 

of FCVs shows that vehicles fuelled with hydrogen produced from 
steam methane reforming of natural gas offer little or no mitigation 
potential over ICEVs. Other available hydrogen fuel chains vary widely 
in carbon intensity, depending on the synthesis method and the 
energy source used (electrolysis or steam methane reforming; fossil 
fuels or renewables). The least carbon-intensive hydrogen pathways 
rely on electrolysis powered by low-carbon electricity. Compared to 
ICEVs and BEVs, FCVs for LDVs are at a lower technology readiness 
level, as discussed in section 10.3.
Box 10.3 | Vehicle Size Trends and Implications on the Fuel Efficiency of LDVs
Vehicle size trends. On a global scale, SUV sales have been constantly growing in the last decade, with 39% of the vehicles sold in 

emissions from the LDV fleet (relative to smaller vehicles with the same powertrain technology). The magnitude of the influence 
vehicle mass has on fuel efficiency varies with the powertrain, which have different efficiencies. Box 10.3 Figure 1 highlights this 
relationship using data from the same literature used to create Figure 10.4. Higher powertrain efficiency results in lower energy losses 
in operation, and thus requires less energy input to move a given mass than a powertrain of lower efficiency. This pattern is illustrated 
by the more gradual slope of BEVs in Box 10.3 Figure 1. The trend towards bigger and heavier vehicles, with consequently higher use 
phase emissions, can be somewhat offset by improvements in powertrain design, fuel efficiency, lightweighting, and aerodynamics 
(Gargoloff et  al. 2018; Wolfram et  al. 2020). The potential improvements provided by these strategies are case specific and not 
thoroughly evaluated in the literature, either individually or as a combination of multiple strategies.
Lightweighting. There is an increasing use of advanced materials such as high-strength steel, aluminium, carbon fibre, and polymer 
composites for vehicle lightweighting (Hottle et al. 2017). These materials reduce the mass of the vehicle and thereby also reduce 
the fuel or energy required to drive. Lightweighted components often have higher production emissions than the components they 
replace due to the advanced materials used (Kim and Wallington 2016). Despite these higher production emissions, some studies 
suggest that the reduced fuel consumption over the lifetime of the lightweighted vehicle may provide a net mitigation effect in 
comparison to a non-lightweighted vehicle (Kim and Wallington 2013; Hottle et al. 2017; Milovanoff et al. 2019; Upadhyayula et al. 
2019; Wolfram et al. 2020). However, multiple recent publications have found that in some cases, depending on, for example, vehicle 
size and carbon intensity of the lightweighting materials employed, the GHG emissions avoided due to improved fuel efficiency do not 
Transport  Chapter 1010
Two-wheelers, consisting mainly of lower-powered mopeds and 
higher-powered motorcycles, are popular for personal transport 
in densely populated cities, especially in developing countries. 
LCA studies for this class of vehicle are relatively uncommon 
compared to four-wheeled LDVs. In the available results, however, 
two-wheelers exhibit similar trends for the different powertrain 
technologies as the LDVs, with electric powertrains having higher 
production emissions, but usually lower operating emissions. The 
lifecycle emissions intensity for two-wheelers is also generally lower 
than four-wheeled LDVs on a  vehicle-kilometre basis. However, 
two-wheelers generally cannot carry as many passengers as four-
wheeled LDVs. Thus, on a passenger-kilometre basis, a fully occupied 
passenger vehicle may still have lower emissions than a  fully 
occupied two-wheeler. However, today, most passenger vehicles 
have relatively low occupancy and thus have a correspondingly high emissions intensity on a pkm basis. This points to the importance 
of utilisation of passenger vehicles at higher occupancies to 
reduce the lifecycle intensity of LDVs on a pkm basis. For example, 
the median emissions intensity of a gasoline passenger vehicle is 

wheeler (Cox and Mutel 2018). At a  maximum occupancy factor 
of four and two passengers, respectively, the transport emissions 
intensity for these vehicles is 55 and 80 gCO 2-eq pkm–1. Under the 
same occupancy rates assumption, BEV two-wheelers recharged on 
the average European electricity mix, achieve lower lifecycle GHG 
intensities than BEV four-wheeled LDVs. On the other hand, FCV 
two-wheelers with hydrogen produced via steam methane reforming 
present higher GHG intensity than their four-wheeled counterparts, 
when compared on a pkm basis at high occupancy rates.Box 10.3 (continued)
offset the higher manufacturing emissions of the vehicle (Luk et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019). In addition, these advanced materials may 
be challenging to recycle in a way that retains their high technical performance (Meng et al. 2017).
Co-effects on particulate matter. Lightweighting may also alleviate the particulate matter (PM) emissions arising from road and 
brake wear. BEVs are generally heavier than their ICEV counterparts, which may potentially cause higher stress on road surfaces 
and tyres, with consequently higher PM emissions per kilometre driven (Timmers and Achten 2016). Regenerative braking in HEVs, 
BEVs and FCVs, however, reduces the mechanical braking required, and therefore may compensate for the higher brake wear emissions 
from these heavier vehicle types. In addition, BEVs have no tailpipe emissions, which further offsets the increased PM emissions from 
road and tyre wear. Therefore, lightweighting strategies may offer a carbon and particulates mitigation effect; however, in some cases, 
other technological options may reduce CO 2 emissions even further.
Box  10.3, Figure  1 | Illustration of energy consumption as a  function of vehicle size (using mass as a  proxy) and powertrain technology.  
FCVs omitted due to lacking data.
Vehicle mass (kg)Energy consumption (MJ km–1)
1200ICEV
HEV
BEVPowertrain type

2345
Chapter 10 Transport10Lifecycle ICEV costs (USD per passenger-km)
Low efﬁciency
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5












0.22 0.31 0.40 0.48 0.57
0.26 0.35 0.44 0.52 0.61
0.30 0.39 0.48 0.56 0.65
0.34 0.43 0.52 0.60 0.690.16 0.24 0.33 0.42 0.51
0.17 0.26 0.35 0.44 0.53
0.19 0.28 0.37 0.46 0.55
0.21 0.30 0.39 0.48 0.57
0.23 0.32 0.41 0.50 0.59
40,000 60,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)80,000 100,000 20,000 40,000 60,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)80,000 100,000
50,0000.29 0.37 0.45 0.53 0.61
0.33 0.41 0.49 0.56 0.64
0.36 0.44 0.52 0.60 0.68
0.40 0.48 0.56 0.63 0.71
0.43 0.51 0.59 0.67 0.750.29 0.37 0.45 0.53 0.61
0.32 0.40 0.48 0.56 0.63
0.35 0.43 0.51 0.58 0.66
0.38 0.46 0.53 0.61 0.69
0.41 0.48 0.56 0.64 0.72
67,500 85,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)102,500 120,000 50,000 67,500 85,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)102,500 120,00020,0000.14 0.23 0.32 0.41 0.50
0.15 0.24 0.33 0.42 0.51
0.16 0.25 0.34 0.43 0.52
0.17 0.26 0.35 0.44 0.53
0.18 0.27 0.36 0.45 0.540.14 0.23 0.32 0.41 0.50
0.14 0.23 0.32 0.41 0.50
0.15 0.24 0.33 0.42 0.51
0.16 0.25 0.33 0.42 0.51
0.16 0.25 0.34 0.43 0.52
40,000 60,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)80,000 100,000 20,000 40,000 60,000
Vehicle purchase price (USD)80,000 100,000Diesel cost (USD L–1)
Diesel cost (USD GJ–1)Electricity cost (USD/MWh)
Electricity cost (USD GJ–1)Hydrogen cost (USD kg–1)
Hydrogen cost (USD GJ–1)High efﬁciency
Low efﬁciency High efﬁciency
Low efﬁciency High efﬁciencyLifecycle BEV costs (USD per passenger-km)
Lifecycle FCV costs (USD per passenger-km)
Figure 10.5 | LCC for light-duty internal combustion engine vehicles, battery electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.  The results for ICEVs represent 
the LCC of a vehicle running on gasoline. However, these values are also representative for ICEVs running on diesel as the costs ranges in the literature for these two solutions 
are similar. The secondary y-axis depicts the cost of the different energy carriers normalised in USD per gigajoule for easier cross-comparability.
Transport  Chapter 1010
ICEV, HEV, and PHEV technologies, which are powered using 
combustion engines, have limited potential for deep reduction 
of GHG emissions. Biofuels offer good mitigation potential if low 
land-use change emissions are incurred (e.g., the IAM EMF33 and 
partial models, CLC biofuels pathways shown in Figure  10.4). The 
literature shows large variability, depending on the method of 
calculating associated land-use changes. Resolving these apparent 
methodological differences is important to consolidating the role 
biofuels may play in mitigation, as well as the issues raised in 
Chapter 7 about the conflicts over land use. The mitigation potential 
of battery and fuel cell vehicles is strongly dependent on the carbon 
intensity of their production and the energy carriers used in operation. 
However, these technologies likely offer the highest potential for 
reducing emissions from LDVs. Prior work on the diffusion dynamics 
of transport technologies suggests that ‘the diffusion of infrastructure 
precedes the adoption of vehicles, which precedes the expansion of 
travel’ (Leibowicz 2018). These dynamics reinforce the argument 
for strong investments in both the energy infrastructure and the 
vehicle technologies.
To successfully transition towards LDVs utilising low-carbon fuels or 
energy sources, the technologies need to be accessible to as many 
people as possible, which requires competitive costs compared to 
conventional diesel and gasoline vehicles. The lifecycle costs (LCCs) of 
LDVs depend on the purchasing costs of the vehicles, their efficiency, 
the fuel costs, and the discount rate. Figure 10.5 shows the results 
of a  parametric analysis of LCC for diesel LDVs, BEVs, and FCVs. 
The range of vehicle efficiencies captured in Figure 10.5 is the same 
as the range used for Figure  10.4, while the ranges for fuel costs 
and vehicle purchase prices come from the literature. The assumed 
discount rate for this parametric analysis is 3%. Appendix  10.2 
includes the details about the method and underlying data used to 
create this figure.
Figure  10.5 shows the range of LCC, in USD per  passenger-
kilometre, for different powertrain technologies, and the influence 
of vehicle efficiency (low or high), vehicle purchase price, and fuel/
electricity cost on the overall LCC. For consistency with Figure 10.4, 
an occupancy rate of 1.5 is assumed. Mid-sized ICEVs have 
a purchase price of USD20,000–40,000, and average fuel costs are 
in the range of USD1–1.5 per litre. With these conditions, the LCC of 
fossil-fuelled LDVs span between USD0.22–0.35 pkm–1 or between 
USD0.17–0.28 pkm–1, for low- and high-efficiency ICEVs respectively 
(Figure 10.5).
BEVs have higher purchase prices than ICEVs, though a sharp decline 
has been observed since AR5. Due to the rapid development of the 
lithium-ion battery technology over the years (Schmidt et al. 2017) 
and the introduction of subsidies in several countries, BEVs are quickly 
reaching cost parity with ICEVs. Mid-sized BEVs’ average purchase 
prices are in the range of USD30,000–50,000 but the levelised cost 
of electricity shows a larger spread (USD65–200/MWh) depending on 
the geographical location and the technology (Chapter 6). Therefore, 
assuming purchase price parity between ICEVs and BEVs, BEVs show 
lower LCC (Figure 10.5) due to higher efficiency and the lower cost 
of electricity compared to fossil fuels on a per-gigajoule (GJ) basis 
(secondary y-axis on Figure 10.5).FCVs represent the most expensive solution for LDV, mainly due to 
the currently higher purchase price of the vehicle itself. However, 
given the lower technology readiness level of FCVs and the current 
efforts in the research and development of this technology, FCVs 
could become a viable technology for LDVs in the coming years. The 
issues regarding the extra energy involved in creating the hydrogen 
and its delivery to refuelling sites remain, however. The levelised 
cost of hydrogen on a per GJ basis is lower than conventional fossil 
fuels but higher than electricity. In addition, within the levelised 
cost of hydrogen, there are significant cost differences between the 
hydrogen-producing technologies. Conventional technologies such 
as coal gasification and steam methane reforming of natural gas, 
both with and without carbon capture and storage, represent the 
cheapest options (Bekel and Pauliuk 2019; Parkinson et  al. 2019; 
Khzouz et al. 2020; Al-Qahtani et al. 2021). Hydrogen produced via 
electrolysis is currently the most expensive technology, but with 
significant potential cost reductions due to the current technology 
readiness level.
10.4.2 Transit Technologies for Passenger Transport
Buses provide urban and peri-urban transport services to millions of 
people around the world and a growing number of transport agencies 
are exploring alternative-fuelled buses. Alternative technologies to 
conventional diesel-powered buses include buses powered with 
CNG, LNG, synthetic fuels, and biofuels (e.g.,  biodiesel, renewable 
diesel, dimethyl ether); diesel hybrid-electric buses; battery electric 
buses; electric catenary buses; and hydrogen fuel cell buses. Rail is 
an alternative mode of transit that could support decarbonisation 
of land-based passenger mobility. Electric rail systems can provide 
urban services (light rail and metro systems), as well as longer-
distance transport. Indeed, many cities of the world already have 
extensive metro systems, and regions like China, Japan and Europe 
have a  robust high-speed intercity railway network. Intercity rail 
transport can be powered with electricity, however, fossil fuels are 
still prevalent for long-distance rail passenger transport in some 
regions. Battery electric long-distance trains may be a future option 
for these areas.
Figure  10.6 shows the lifecycle GHG emissions from different 
powertrain and fuel technologies for buses and passenger rail. The 
data in each panel came from a number of relevant scientific studies 
(Cai et al. 2015; Tong et al. 2015a; Dimoula et al. 2016; de Bortoli et al. 
2017; Valente et al. 2017; Meynerts et al. 2018; IEA 2019e; de Bortoli 
and Christoforou 2020; Hill et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a; Valente et al. 
2021). The width of the bar represents the variability in available 
estimates, which is primarily driven by variability in reported vehicle 
efficiency, size, or drive cycle. While some bars overlap, the Figure 
may not fully capture correlations between results. For example, low 
efficiency associated with aggressive drive cycles may drive the upper 
end of the emission ranges for multiple technologies; thus, an overlap 
does not necessarily suggest uncertainty regarding which vehicle 
type would have lower emissions for a comparable trip. Additionally, 
reported lifecycle emissions do not include embodied GHG emissions 
associated with infrastructure construction and maintenance. 
These embodied emissions are potentially a  larger fraction of 
Chapter 10 Transport10lifecycle emissions for rail than for other transport modes (Chester 
and Horvath 2012; Chester et al. 2013). One study reported values 
ranging from 10–25 gCO 2 per  passenger-kilometre (International 
Union of Railways 2016), although embodied emissions from rail are 
known to vary widely across case studies (Olugbenga et al. 2019). 
These caveats are also applicable to the other figures in this section.
Figure 10.6 highlights that BEV and FCV buses and passenger rail 
powered with low-carbon electricity or low-carbon hydrogen, could 
offer reductions in GHG emissions compared to diesel-powered buses 
or diesel-powered passenger rail. However, and not surprisingly, 
these technologies would offer only little emissions reductions if 
power generation and hydrogen production rely on fossil fuels. While 
buses powered with CNG and LNG could offer some reductions 
compared to diesel-powered buses, these reductions are unlikely to 
be sufficient to contribute to deep decarbonisation of the transport 
sector and they may slow down conversion to low- or zero-carbon 
options already commercially available. Biodiesel and renewable 
diesel fuels (from sources with low upstream emissions and low 
risk of induced land-use change) could offer important near-term 
reductions for buses and passenger rail, as these fuels can often be 
used with existing vehicle infrastructure. They could also be used for 
long haul trucks and trains, shipping and aviation as discussed below 
and in later sections.
There has been growing interest in the production of synthetic fuels 
from CO 2 produced by direct air capture (DAC) processes. Figure 10.6 
includes the lifecycle GHG emissions from buses and passenger 
rail powered with synthetic diesel produced through a DAC system 
paired with a Fischer-Tropsch (FT) process, based on Liu et al. (2020a). 
This process requires the use of hydrogen (as shown in Figure 10.2), 
so the emissions factors of the resulting fuel depend on the emissions 
intensity of hydrogen production. An electricity emissions factor less 
than 140 gCO 2-eq kWh–1 would be required for this pathway to 
achieve lower emissions than petroleum diesel (Liu et al. 2020a); for 
example, this would be equivalent to a 75% wind and 25% natural 
gas electricity mix (Appendix 10.1). If the process relied on steam 
methane reforming for hydrogen production or fossil-based power 
generation, synthetic diesel from the DAC-FT process would not 
provide GHG emissions reductions compared to conventional diesel. 
DAC-FT from low-carbon energy sources appears to be promising 
from an emissions standpoint and could warrant the R&D and 
demonstration attention outlined in the rest of the chapter, but it 
cannot be contemplated as a decarbonisation strategy without the 
availability of low-carbon hydrogen.
At high occupancy, both bus and rail transport offer substantial 
GHG reduction potential per pkm, even compared with the lowest-
emitting private vehicle options. Even at 20% occupancy, bus and 
rail may still offer emission reductions compared to passenger cars, 
especially notable when comparing BEVs with low-carbon electricity 
(the lowest-emission option for all technologies) across the three 
modes. Only when comparing a  fossil fuel-powered bus at low 
occupancy with a low-carbon powered car at high occupancy is this 
conclusion reversed. Use of public transit systems, especially those 
that rely on buses and passenger rail fuelled with the low-carbon 
fuels previously described, would thus support efforts to decarbonise the transport sector. Use of these public transit systems will depend 
on urban design and consumer preferences (Section 10.2, Chapters 5 
and 8), which in turn depend on time, costs, and behavioural choices.
Figure 10.7 shows the results of a parametric analysis of the LCCs 
of transit technologies with the highest potential for GHG emissions 
reductions. As with Figure 10.5, the vehicle efficiency ranges are the 
same as those from the LCA estimates (80% occupancy). Vehicle, 
fuel, and maintenance costs represent ranges in the literature 
(Eudy and Post 2018b; IEA 2019e; Argonne National Laboratory 
2020; BNEF 2020; Eudy and Post 2020; Hydrogen Council 2020; IEA 
2020b; IEA 2020c; IRENA 2020; Johnson et al. 2020; Burnham et al. 
2021; IEA 2021c; IEA 2021d; US Energy Information Administration 
2021), and the discount rate is 3% where applicable. Appendix 10.2 
provides the details behind these estimates. The panels for the ICEV 
can represent buses and passenger trains powered with any form 
of diesel, whether derived from petroleum, synthetic hydrocarbons, 
or biofuels. For reference, global average automotive diesel prices 
from 2015–2020 fluctuated around USD1 per  litre, and the 2019 
world average industrial electricity price was approximately 
USD100 per MWh (IEA 2021d). Retail hydrogen prices in excess of 
USD13 per  kilogram have been observed (Eudy and Post 2018a; 
Argonne National Laboratory 2020; Burnham et  al. 2021) though 
current production cost estimates for hydrogen produced from 
electrolysis are far lower (IRENA 2020) (and as reported in Chapter 6), 
at around USD5–7 per kg with future forecasts as low as USD1 per kg 
(BNEF 2020; Hydrogen Council 2020; IRENA 2020) (and as reported 
in Chapter 6).
Under most parameter combinations, rail is the most cost-effective 
option, followed by buses, both of which are an order of magnitude 
cheaper than passenger vehicles. Note that costs per  pkm are 
strongly influenced by occupancy assumptions; at low occupancy 
(e.g.,  <20% for buses and <10% for rail), the cost of transit 
approaches the LCC for passenger cars. For diesel rail and buses, cost 
ranges are driven by fuel costs, whereas vehicles are both important 
drivers for electric or hydrogen modes due to high costs (but also 
large projected improvements) associated with batteries and fuel 
cell stacks. Whereas the current state of ICEV technologies is best 
represented by cheap vehicles and low fuel costs for diesel (top left 
of each panel), these costs are likely to rise in future due to stronger 
emission/efficiency regulations and rising crude oil prices. On the 
contrary, the current status of alternative fuels is better represented 
by high capital costs and mid-to-high fuel costs (right side of each 
panel; mid-to-bottom rows), but technology costs are anticipated 
to fall with increasing experience, research, and development. 
Thus, while electric rail is already competitive with diesel rail, and 
electric buses are competitive with diesel buses in the low efficiency 
case, improvements are still required in battery costs to compete 
against modern diesel buses on high efficiency routes, at current 
diesel costs. Similarly, improvements to both vehicle cost and fuel 
costs are required for hydrogen vehicles to become cost effective 
compared to their diesel or electric counterparts. At either the 
upper end of the diesel cost range (bottom row of ICEV panels), or 
within the 2030–2050 projections for battery costs, fuel cell costs 
and hydrogen costs (top left of BEV and FCV panels), both battery- 
and hydrogen-powered vehicles become financially attractive.
Transport  Chapter 1010
Diesel
Diesel, high
Compressed natural gas
Diesel
Liqueﬁed natural gas
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity
Diesel
Diesel, high
Vehicle cycle
Wind electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Hydrogen, low-carbon renewable
Hydrogen, natural gas SMR
Diesel
Diesel, high
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity
Diesel
Diesel, high
Wind electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Hydrogen, low-carbon renewable
Hydrogen, natural gas SMRBuses
Lifecycle GHG intensity, 20% occupancy (gCO2-eq per passenger-km)FCV BEV HEV ICEV FCV BEV HEV ICEVLifecycle GHG intensity, 80% occupancy (g CO2-eq per passenger-km)0 80 160 240 320 400
Rail
Life cycle GHG intensity, 20% occupancy (gCO2-eq per passenger-km)

Life cycle GHG intensity, 80% occupancy (gCO2-eq per passenger-km)0 20 40 60 80 100
Figure 10.6 | Lifecycle greenhouse gas intensity of land-based bus and rail technologies.  Each bar represents the range of the lifecycle estimates, bounded by 
minimum and maximum energy use per passenger-kilometre, as reported for each fuel/powertrain combination. The ranges are driven by differences in vehicle characteristics 
and operating efficiency. For energy sources with highly variable upstream emissions, low, medium and/or high representative values are shown as separate rows. The primary 
x-axis shows lifecycle GHG emissions, in gCO 2-eq pkm–1, assuming 80% occupancy; the secondary x-axis assumes 20% occupancy. The values in the figure rely on the 100-year 
GWP value embedded in the source data, which may differ slightly from the updated 100-year GWP values from WGI. For buses, the main bars show full lifecycle, with vertical 
bars disaggregating the vehicle cycle. ‘Diesel, high’ references emissions factors for diesel from oil sands. ‘advanced biofuels’, refers to the use of second-generation biofuels and 
their respective conversion and cultivation emissions factors. ‘IAM EMF33’ refers to emissions factors for advanced biofuels derived from simulation results from the integrated 
assessment models EMF33 scenarios. ‘PM’ refers to partial models, where ‘CLC’ is with constant land cover and ‘NRG’ is with natural regrowth. ‘DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity’ 
refers to Fischer-Tropsch diesel produced via a CO 2 direct air capture process that uses wind electricity. ‘Hydrogen, low-carbon renewable’ refers to fuels produced via electrolysis 
using low-carbon electricity. ‘Hydrogen, natural gas SMR’ refers to fuels produced via steam methane reforming of natural gas. Results for ICEVs with ‘high emissions DAC FT-
Diesel from natural gas’ are not included here since the lifecycle emissions are estimated to be substantially higher than petroleum diesel ICEVs.
Chapter 10 Transport10
10.4.3 Land-based Freight Transport
As is the case with passenger transport, there is growing interest 
in alternative fuels that could reduce GHG emissions from freight 
transport. Natural gas-based fuels (e.g., CNG, LNG) are an example, 
however these may not lead to drastic reductions in GHG emissions 
compared to diesel. Natural gas-powered vehicles have been 
discussed as a  means to mitigate air quality impacts (Khan et  al. 
2015; Cai et  al. 2017; Pan et  al. 2020), but those impacts are not the focus of this review. Decarbonisation of medium- and heavy-duty 
trucks would likely require the use of low-carbon electricity in battery 
electric trucks, low-carbon hydrogen or ammonia in fuel-cell trucks, 
or bio-based fuels (from sources with low upstream emissions and 
low risk of induced land-use change) used in ICE trucks.
Freight rail is also a major mode for the inland movement of goods. 
Trains are more energy efficient (per tkm) than trucks, so expanded 
use of rail systems (particularly in developing countries where Lifecycle costs of buses Lifecycle costs of passenger rail
Low efﬁciency
430Diesel cost (USD L–1)0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Diesel cost (USD L–1)0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Diesel cost (USD GJ–1)13






















































Diesel cost (USD GJ–1)13







55Hydrogen cost (USD GJ–1)





108Electricity cost (USD MWh–1)





200Hydrogen cost (USD kg–1)







0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 600 750 900 1050 1200 600 750 900 1050 1200Low efﬁciencyLifecycle ICEV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km)
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD/km)
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)Lifecycle ICEV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km)
High efﬁciency High efﬁciency
Low efﬁciency Low efﬁciencyLifecycle BEV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km) Lifecycle BEV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km)
High efﬁciency High efﬁciency
Low efﬁciency Low efﬁciencyLifecycle FCV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km) Lifecycle FCV costs (USD per thousand passenger-km)
High efﬁciency High efﬁciency430 447 465 482 500
Figure 10.7 | Lifecycle costs for internal combustion engine vehicles, battery electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles for buses and passenger 
rail. The range of efficiencies for each vehicle type are consistent with the range of efficiencies in Figure 10.6 (80% occupancy). The results for the ICEV can be used to evaluate 
the lifecycle costs of ICE buses and passenger rail operated with any form of diesel, whether from petroleum, synthetic hydrocarbons, or biofuel, as the range of efficiencies 
of vehicles operating with all these fuels is similar. The secondary y-axis depicts the cost of the different energy carriers normalised in USD/GJ for easier cross-comparability.
Transport  Chapter 1010
Diesel
Diesel, high
Compressed natural gas
Liqueﬁed natural gas
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity
Ammonia, low carbon renewable
Ammonia, natural gas SMR
Diesel
Diesel, high
Wind electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Hydrogen, low-carbon renewable
Hydrogen, natural gas SMR
Ammonia, low carbon renewable
Ammonia, natural gas SMR
Diesel
Diesel, high
Compressed natural gas
Liqueﬁed natural gas
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity
Ammonia, low carbon renewable
Ammonia, natural gas SMR
Diesel
Diesel, high
Advanced biofuels, IAM EMF33
Advanced biofuels, PM CLC
Advanced biofuels, PM NRG
DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricityDiesel
Diesel, high
Liqueﬁed natural gas
Wind electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Wind electricity
Natural gas electricity
Coal electricity
Hydrogen, low-carbon renewable
Hydrogen, natural gas SMRHydrogen, low-carbon renewable
Hydrogen, natural gas SMR
Ammonia, low carbon renewable
Ammonia, natural gas SMRFCV BEV HEV ICEV FCV BEV ICEVHeavy-duty trucks
RailLifecycle GHG intensity, 50% payload (gCO2-eq per tonne-km)

FCV BEV HEV ICEVMedium-duty trucks
Lifecycle GHG intensity, 50% payload (gCO2-eq per tonne-km)

Life cycle GHG intensity, 100% payload (gCO2-eq per tonne-km)0 50 100 150 250 200 300 350 400
Lifecycle GHG intensity, 100% payload (gCO2-eq per tonne-km)0 50 100 150 250 200 300 350 400
Life cycle GHG intensity (gCO2-eq per tonne-km)0 50 100 150 250 200 300 350 400
Vehicle cycleVehicle cycle
Figure 10.8 | Lifecycle greenhouse gas intensity of land-based freight technologies and fuel types.  
Chapter 10 Transport10demand for goods could grow exponentially) could provide carbon 
abatement opportunities. While diesel-based locomotives are still 
a  major mode of propulsion used in freight rail, interest in low-
carbon propulsion technologies is growing. Electricity already powers 
freight rail in many European countries using overhead catenaries. 
Other low-carbon technologies for rail may include advanced storage 
technologies, biofuels, synthetic fuels, ammonia, or hydrogen.
Figure 10.8 presents a review of lifecycle GHG emissions from land-
based freight technologies (heavy- and medium-duty trucks, and 
rail). Each panel within the figure represents data in GHG emissions 
per  tonne-kilometre of freight transported by different technology 
and/or fuel types, as indicated by the labels to the left. The data in 
each panel came from a number of relevant scientific studies (Tong 
et al. 2015a; Frattini et al. 2016; Nahlik et al. 2016; Zhao et al. 2016; 
CE Delft 2017; Isaac and Fulton 2017; Song et  al. 2017; Valente 
et  al. 2017; Cooper and Balcombe 2019; Lajevardi et  al. 2019; 
Hill et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a; Merchan et al. 2020; Prussi et al. 2020; 
Gray et al. 2021; Valente et al. 2021). Similar to the results for buses, 
technologies that offer substantial emissions reductions for freight 
include: ICEV trucks powered with the low-carbon variants for 
biofuels, ammonia or synthetic diesel; BEVs charged with low-carbon 
electricity; and FCVs powered with renewable-based electrolytic 
hydrogen, or ammonia. Since ammonia and Fischer-Tropsch diesel 
are produced from hydrogen, their emissions are higher than the 
source hydrogen, but their logistical advantages over hydrogen are 
also a consideration (Section 10.3).
Trucks exhibit economies of scale in fuel consumption, with 
heavy-duty trucks generally showing lower emissions per tkm than 
medium-duty trucks. Comparing the lifecycle GHG emissions from 
trucks and rail, it is clear that rail using internal combustion engines 
is more carbon efficient than using internal combustion trucks. Note 
that the rail emissions are reported for an average representative 
payload, while the trucks are presented at 50% and 100% 
payload, based on available data. The comparison between trucks 
and rail powered with electricity or hydrogen is less clear  – 
especially considering that these values omit embodied GHG 
from infrastructure construction. One study reported embodied 
rail infrastructure emissions of 15 gCO 2 per tonne-kilometre for rail 
(International Union of Railways 2016), although such embodied 
emissions from rail are known to vary widely across case studies 
(Olugbenga et  al. 2019). Regardless, trucks and rail with low-
carbon electricity or low-carbon hydrogen have substantially lower 
emissions than incumbent technologies.For trucks, Figure 10.8 includes two x-axes representing two different 
assumptions about their payload, which substantially influence 
emissions per tonne-kilometre. These results highlight the importance 
of truckload planning as an emissions reduction mechanism, for 
example, as also shown in Kaack et  al. (2018). Several studies 
also point to improvements in vehicle efficiency as an important 
mechanism to reduce emissions from freight transport (Taptich et al. 
2016; Kaack et  al. 2018). However, projections for diesel vehicles 
using such efficiencies beyond 2030 are promising, but still far higher 
emitting than vehicles powered with low-carbon sources.
Figure 10.9 shows the results of a parametric analysis of the LCC 
of trucks and freight rail technologies with the highest potential 
for deep GHG reductions. As with Figure 10.8, the vehicle efficiency 
ranges are the same as those from the LCA estimates (80% payload 
for trucks; effective payload as reported by original studies for 
rail). Vehicle, fuel and maintenance costs represent ranges in the 
literature (Moultak et  al. 2017; Eudy and Post 2018b; IEA 2019e; 
Argonne National Laboratory 2020; BNEF 2020; IRENA 2020; 
Burnham et al. 2021; IEA 2021c), and the discount rate is 3% where 
applicable (Appendix 10.2). The panels for the ICEV can represent 
trucks and freight trains powered with any form of diesel, whether 
derived from petroleum, synthetic hydrocarbons, or biofuels. See 
discussion preceding Figure 10.7 for additional details about current 
global fuel costs. Under most parameter combinations, rail is the 
more cost-effective option, but the high efficiency case for trucks 
(representing fuel-efficient vehicles, favourable drive cycles and high 
payload) can be more cost-effective than the low efficiency case for 
rail (representing systems with higher fuel consumption and lower 
payload). For BEV trucks, cost ranges are driven by vehicle purchase 
price due to the large batteries required and the associated wide 
range between their current high costs and anticipated future cost 
reductions. For all other truck and rail technologies, fuel cost ranges 
play a larger role. Similar to transit technologies, the current state 
of freight ICEV technologies is best represented by cheap vehicles 
and low fuel costs for diesel (top left of each panel), and the current 
status of alternative fuels is better represented by high capital costs 
and mid-to-high fuel costs (right side of each panel; mid-to-bottom 
rows), with expected future increases in ICEV LCC and decreases in 
alternative fuel vehicle LCC. Electric and hydrogen freight rail are 
potentially already competitive with diesel rail (especially electric 
catenary (IEA 2019e)), but low data availability (especially for 
hydrogen efficiency ranges) and wide ranges for reported diesel 
rail efficiency (likely encompassing low capacity utilisation) makes 
this comparison challenging. Alternative fuel trucks are currently 
more expensive than diesel trucks, but future increases in diesel 
costs or a respective decrease in hydrogen costs or in BEV capital Figure 10.8 (continued): Lifecycle greenhouse gas intensity of land-based freight technologies and fuel types.  Each bar represents the range of the lifecycle 
estimates, bounded by minimum and maximum energy use per  tkm, as reported for each fuel/powertrain combination. The ranges are driven by differences in vehicle 
characteristics and operating efficiency. For energy sources with highly variable upstream emissions, low, medium and/or high representative values are shown as separate 
rows. For trucks, the primary x-axis shows lifecycle GHG emissions, in gCO 2-eq tkm–1, assuming 100% payload; the secondary x-axis assumes 50% payload. The values in the 
figure rely on the 100-year GWP value embedded in the source data, which may differ slightly from the updated 100-year GWP values from WGI. For rail, values represent 
average payloads. For trucks, main bars show full lifecycle, with vertical bars disaggregating the vehicle cycle. ‘Diesel, high’ references emissions factors for diesel from oil sands. 
‘Advanced biofuels’ refers to the use of second-generation biofuels and their respective conversion and cultivation emission factors. ‘IAM EMF33’ refers to emissions factors for 
advanced biofuels derived from simulation results from the EMF33 scenarios. ‘PM’ refers to partial models, where ‘CLC’ is with constant land cover and ‘NRG’ is with natural 
regrowth. DAC FT-Diesel, wind electricity refers to Fischer-Tropsch diesel produced via a CO 2 direct air capture process that uses wind electricity. ‘Ammonia and Hydrogen, low-
carbon renewable’ refers to fuels produced via electrolysis using low-carbon electricity. ‘Ammonia and Hydrogen, natural gas SMR’ refers to fuels produced via steam methane 
reforming of natural gas.
Transport  Chapter 1010
costs (especially the battery) would enable either alternative fuel 
technology to become financially attractive. These results are largely 
consistent with raw results reported in existing literature, which 
suggest ambiguity over whether BEV trucks are already competitive, 
but more consistency that hydrogen is not yet competitive, but could 
be in future (Zhao et al. 2016; Moultak et al. 2017; Sen et al. 2017; 
White and Sintov 2017; Zhou et al. 2017; Mareev et al. 2018; Yang 
et  al. 2018a; El Hannach et  al. 2019; Lajevardi et  al. 2019; Tanco 
et al. 2019; Burke and Sinha 2020; Jones et al. 2020). There is limited 
data available on the LCC for freight rail, but at least one study 
IEA (2019g) suggests that electric catenary rail is likely to have 
similar costs to diesel rail, while battery electric trains remain more 
expensive and hydrogen rail could become cheaper under forward-
looking cost reduction scenarios.10.4.4 Abatement Costs
Taken together, the results in this section suggest a range of cost-
effective opportunities to reduce GHG emissions from land-based 
transport. Mode shift from cars to passenger transit (bus or rail) 
can reduce GHG emissions while also reducing LCCs, resulting in 
a  negative abatement cost. Likewise, increasing the utilisation of 
vehicles (i.e.,  % occupancy for passenger vehicles or % payload 
for freight vehicles) simultaneously decreases emissions and costs 
per pkm or per tkm, respectively. Within a given mode, alternative fuel 
sources also show strong potential to reduce emissions at minimal 
added costs. For LDVs, BEVs can offer emissions reductions with LCCs 
that are already approaching that for conventional ICEVs. For transit 
and freight, near-term abatement costs for the low-carbon BEV and 
FCV options relative to their diesel counterparts range from near 
USD0/tonne CO 2-eq (e.g., BEV buses and BEV passenger rail) into the Lifecycle costs of buses Lifecycle costs of passenger railDiesel cost (USD L–1)0.5 26 28 30 32 34












































1.5
2.0
2.5
Diesel cost (USD L–1)0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5Diesel cost (USD GJ–1)13


Diesel cost (USD GJ–1)13



Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD) Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)90 130 170 210 250 1 1
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD)Lifecycle ICEV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km) Lifecycle ICEV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km)
Low efﬁciency Low efﬁciency High efﬁciency High efﬁciencyHydrogen cost (USD GJ–1)





108Hydrogen cost (USD kg–1)






Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD)130 170 210 250 290
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD)2 4 6 8 10
Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)Lifecycle FCV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km) Lifecycle FCV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km)
Low efﬁciency High efﬁciency
Electricity cost (USD GJ–1)





55Electricity cost (USD MWh–1)






Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD)120 285 450 615 780
Vehicle purchase price (thousand USD)6 11 16 21 26
Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)6 11 16 21 26
Powertrain and Vehicle O&M (USD km–1)Lifecycle BEV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km) Lifecycle BEV costs (USD per thousand tonne-km)
Low efﬁciency Low efﬁciency High efﬁciency High efﬁciency
Figure 10.9 | Life cycle costs for internal combustion engine vehicles, battery electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles for heavy-duty trucks and 
freight rail.  The range of efficiencies for each vehicle type are consistent with the range of efficiencies in Figure 10.8. The results for ICEV can be used to evaluate the lifecycle 
costs of ICE trucks and freight rail operated with any form of diesel, whether from petroleum, synthetic hydrocarbons, or biofuels, as the range of efficiencies of vehicles operating 
with all these fuels is similar. The secondary y-axis depicts the cost of the different energy carriers normalised in USD per GJ for easier cross-comparability.
Chapter 10 Transport10hundreds or even low thousands of dollars per tonne CO 2-eq (e.g., for 
heavy-duty BEV and FCV trucks at current vehicle and fuel costs). 
With projected future declines in storage, fuel cell, and low-carbon 
hydrogen fuel costs, however, both BEV and FCV technologies can 
likewise offer GHG reductions at negative abatement costs across all 
land-transport modes in 2030 and beyond. Further information about 
costs and potentials is available in Chapter 12.
10.5 Decarbonisation of Aviation
This section addresses the potential for reducing GHG emissions from 
aviation. The overriding constraint on developments in technology 
and energy efficiency for this sector is safety. Governance is 
complex in that international aviation comes under the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a  specialised UN agency. The 
measures to reduce GHG emissions that are considered include both 
in-sector (technology, operations, fuels) and out of sector (market-
based measures, high-speed rail modal shift/substitution). Demand 
management is not explicitly considered in this section, as it was 
discussed in 10.2. A limited range of scenarios to 2050 and beyond 
are available and assessed at the end of the section.
10.5.1 Historical and Current Emissions from Aviation
Aviation is widely recognised as a ‘hard-to-decarbonise’ sector (Gota 
et al. 2019) having a strong dependency on liquid fossil fuels and an 
infrastructure that has long ‘lock-in’ timescales, resulting in slow fleet 
turnover times. The principal GHG emitted is CO 2 from the combustion of fossil fuel aviation kerosene (‘Jet-A’), although its non-CO 2 
emissions can also affect climate (Section  10.5.2). International 
emissions of CO 2 are about 65% of the total emissions from aviation 
(Fleming and de Lépinay 2019), which totalled approximately 1 Gt 
of CO 2 in 2018. Emissions from this segment of the transport sector 
have been steadily increasing at rates of around 2.5% per year over 
the last two decades (Figure 10.10), although for the period 2010 to 

data (2018) indicate that aviation is responsible for approximately 
2.4% of total anthropogenic emissions of CO 2 (including land-use 
change) on an annual basis (using IEA data, IATA data and global 
emissions data of Le Quéré et al. (2018b)).
10.5.2 Short-lived Climate Forcers and Aviation
Aviation’s net warming effect results from its historical and current 
emissions of CO 2, and non-CO 2 emissions of water vapour, soot, 
sulphur dioxide (from sulphur in the fuel), and nitrogen oxides 
(NO x, = NO + NO 2) (IPCC 1999; Lee et al. 2021; Szopa et al. 2021). 
Although the effective radiative forcing (ERF) of CO 2 from historic 
aviation emissions is not currently the largest forcing term, it is difficult 
to address because of the sector’s current dependency on fossil-based 
hydrocarbon fuels and the longevity of CO 2. A residual of emissions of 
CO2 today will still have a warming effect in many thousands of years 
(Archer et al. 2009; Canadell et al. 2021) whereas water vapour, soot, 
and NO x emissions will have long ceased to contribute to warming 
after some decades. As a result, CO 2 mitigation of aviation to net zero 
levels, as required in 1.5°C scenarios, requires fundamental shifts in 
technology, fuel types, or changes of behaviour or demand.
Figure 10.10 | Historical global emissions of CO 2 from aviation, along with capacity and transport work (given in available seat kilometres, ASK; revenue 
passenger-kilometres, RPK).  Source: adapted from Lee et al. (2021) using IEA and other data.
Transport  Chapter 1010
The non-CO 2 effects of aviation on climate fall into the category of 
short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs). Emissions of NO x currently result 
in net positive warming from the formation of short-term ozone 
(warming) and the destruction of ambient methane (cooling). If the 
conditions are suitable, emissions of soot and water vapour can 
trigger the formation of contrails (Kärcher 2018), which can spread 
to form extensive contrail-cirrus cloud coverage. Such cloud coverage 
is estimated to have a combined ERF that is about 57% of the current 
net ERF of global aviation (Lee et al. 2021), although a comparison 
of cirrus cloud observations under pre- and post-COVID-19 pandemic 
conditions suggest that this forcing could be smaller (Digby et  al. 
2021). Additional effects from aviation from aerosol-cloud interactions 
on high-level ice clouds through soot (Chen and Gettelman 2013; 
Zhou and Penner 2014; Penner et al. 2018), and lower-level warm 
clouds through sulphur (Righi et al. 2013; Kapadia et al. 2016) are 
highly uncertain, with no best estimates available (Lee et al. 2021). 
In total, the net ERF from aviation’s non-CO 2 SLCFs is estimated to be 
approximately 66% of aviation’s current total forcing. It is important 
to note that the fraction of non-CO 2 forcing to total forcing is not 
a fixed quantity and is dependent on the recent history of growth (or 
otherwise) of CO 2 emissions (Klöwer et al. 2021). The non-CO 2 effects 
from aviation are the subject of discussion for mitigation options 
(Arrowsmith et al. 2020). However, the issues are complex, potentially 
involving technological and operational trade-offs with CO 2.
10.5.3 Mitigation Potential of Fuels, Operations, Energy 
Efficiency, and Market-based Measures
Technology options for engine and airframe. For every kilogram 
of jet fuel combusted, 3.16 kg CO 2 is emitted. Engine and airframe 
manufacturers’ primary objective, after safety issues, is to reduce 
direct operating costs, which are highly dependent on fuel burn. 
Large investments have gone into engine technology and aircraft 
aerodynamics to improve fuel burn per  kilometre (Cumpsty et  al. 
2019). There have been major step changes in engine technology 
over time, from early turbojet engines to larger turbofan engines. 
However, the basic configuration of an aircraft has remained more 
or less the same for decades and will likely remain at least to 2037 
(Cumpsty et  al. 2019). Airframes performance has improved over 
the years with better wing design, but large incremental gains have 
become much harder as the technology has matured. For twin-
aisle aircraft, generally used for long ranges, fuel-burn is a pressing 
concern and there have been several all-new aircraft designs with 
improvements in their lift-to-drag ratio (Cumpsty et  al. 2019). The 
principal opportunities for fuel reduction come from improvements 
in aerodynamic efficiency, aircraft mass reduction, and propulsion 
system improvements. In the future, Cumpsty et al. (2019) suggest 
that the highest rate of fuel burn reduction achievable for new aircraft 
is likely to be no more than about 1.3% per year, which is well short of 
ICAO’s aspirational goal of 2% global annual average fuel efficiency 
improvement. Radically different aircraft shapes, like the blended 
wing body (where the wings are not distinct from the fuselage), are 
likely to use about 10% less fuel than future advanced aircraft of 
conventional form (Cumpsty et al. 2019). Such improvements would 
be ‘one-off’ gains, do not compensate for growth in emissions of CO 2 
expected to be in excess of 2% per annum, and would take a decade or more to penetrate the fleet completely. Thus, the literature does 
not support the idea that there are large improvements to be made 
in the energy efficiency of aviation that keep pace with the projected 
growth in air transport.
Operational improvements for navigation. From a  global 
perspective, aircraft navigation is relatively efficient, with many long-
haul routes travelling close to great circle trajectories, and avoiding 
headwinds that increase fuel consumption. The ICAO estimates that 
flight inefficiencies on a global basis are currently of the order 2% 
to 6% (ICAO 2019), while Fleming and de Lépinay (2019) project 
operational improvements (air traffic management) of up to 13% on 
a regional basis by 2050. ‘Intermediate stop operations’ have been 
suggested, whereby longer-distance travel is broken into flight legs, 
obviating the need to carry fuel for the whole mission. Linke et al. 
(2017) modelled this operational behaviour on a  global basis and 
calculated a fuel saving of 4.8% over a base case in which normal 
fuel loads were carried. However, this approach increases the number 
of landing/take-off cycles at airports. ‘Formation flying’, which has 
the potential to reduce fuel burn on feasible routes, has also been 
proposed (Xu et al. 2014; Marks et al. 2021).
Alternative biofuels, synthetic fuels, and liquid hydrogen. As 
noted above, the scope for reducing CO 2 emissions from aviation 
through improved airplane technology or operations is limited and 
unable to keep up with the projected growth, let al.ne reduce beyond 
the present emission rate at projected levels of demand (assuming 
post-pandemic recovery of traffic). Thus, the literature outlined here 
suggests that the only way for demand for aviation to continue to 
grow without increasing CO 2 emissions is to employ alternative 
lower-carbon bio- or synthetic aviation fuels (Klöwer et al. 2021). For 
shorter ranges, flights of light planes carrying up to 50 passengers 
may be able to use electric power (Sahoo et  al. 2020) but these 
planes are a  small proportion of the global aviation fleet (Epstein 
and O’Flarity 2019; Langford and Hall 2020) and account for less 
than 12% of current aviation CO 2 emissions. Alternative lower-
carbon footprint fuels have been certified for use over recent years, 
principally from bio-feedstocks, but are not yet widely available at 
economic prices (Kandaramath Hari et al. 2015; Capaz et al. 2021a). 
In addition, alternative fuels from bio-feedstocks have variable 
carbon footprints because of different lifecycle emissions associated 
with various production methods and associated land-use change 
(de Jong et al. 2017; Staples et al. 2018; Capaz et al. 2021b; Zhao 
et al. 2021).
The development of ‘sustainable aviation fuels’ (referred to as 
‘SAFs’) that can reduce aviation’s carbon footprint is a  growing 
area of interest and research. Alternative aviation fuels to replace 
fossil-based kerosene have to be certified to an equivalent standard 
as Jet-A for a  variety of parameters associated with safety issues. 
Currently, the organisation responsible for aviation fuel standards, 
ASTM International, has certified seven different types of sustainable 
aviation fuels with maximum blends ranging from 10% to 50% 
(Chiaramonti 2019). Effectively, these blend requirements limit the 
amount of non-hydrocarbon fuel (e.g., methanol) that can be added 
at present. While there currently is a  minimum level of aromatic 
hydrocarbon contained in jet fuel to prevent ‘O-ring’ shrinkage in 
Chapter 10 Transport10the fuel seals (Khandelwal et al. 2018), this minimum level can likely 
be lower in the medium to long term, with the added benefits of 
reduced soot formation and reduced contrail cirrus formation (Bier 
et al. 2017; Bier and Burkhardt 2019).
Bio-based fuels can be produced using a  variety of feedstocks 
including cultivated feedstock crops, crop residues, municipal solid 
waste, waste fats, oils and greases, wood products and forestry 
residues (Staples et  al. 2018). Each of these different sources can 
have different associated lifecycle emissions, such that they are 
not net zero CO 2 emissions but have associated emissions of CO 2 
or other GHGs from their production and distribution (Section 10.3, 
Box 10.2). In addition, associated land-use change emissions of CO 2 
represent a  constraint in climate change mitigation potential with 
biofuel (Staples et  al. 2017) and have inherent large uncertainties 
(Plevin et al. 2010). Other sustainability issues include food vs fuel 
arguments, water resource use, and impacts on biodiversity. Cost-
effective production, feedstock availability, and certification costs are 
also relevant (Kandaramath Hari et al. 2015). Nonetheless, bio-based 
SAFs have been estimated to achieve lifecycle emissions reductions 
ranging between approximately 2% and 70% under a wide range 
of scenarios (Staples et  al. 2018). For a  set of European aviation 
demand scenarios, Kousoulidou and Lonza (2016) estimated that 
the fuel demand in 2030 would be about 100 million tonnes of oil 
equivalent and biokerosene (HEFA/HVO) penetration would provide 
around 2% of the total fuel demand at that date. Several issues limit 
the expansion of biokerosene for aviation, the primary one being the 
current cost of fossil fuel compared to the costs of SAF production 
(Capaz et  al. 2021a). Other hybrid pathways, for example the 
hydrogenation of biofuels (the hydrogen assumed to be generated 
with low-carbon energy), could increase the output and improve 
the economic feasibility of bio-based SAF (Hannula 2016; Albrecht 
et al. 2017).
Costs remain a major barrier for bio-SAF , which cost around three 
times the price of kerosene (Kandaramath Hari et al. 2015). Clearly, 
for SAFs to be economically competitive, large adjustments in prices 
of fossil fuels or the introduction of policies is required. Staples 
et  al. (2018) estimated that in order to introduce bio-SAFs that 
reduce lifecycle GHG emissions by at least 50% by 2050, prices 
and policies were necessary for incentivisation. They estimate the 
need for 268  new biorefineries per  year and capital investments 
of approximately 22 to 88 billion USD2015 per year between 2020 
and 2050. Wise et al. (2017) suggest that carbon prices would help 
leverage production and availability.
Various pathways have been discussed for the production of 
non-bio SAFs such as power-to-liquid pathways (Schmidt et  al. 
2018), sometimes termed ‘electro-fuels’ (Goldmann et  al. 2018), 
or more generalised ‘Power-to-X’ pathways (Kober and Bauer 
2019). This process would involve the use of low-carbon electricity, 
CO2, and water to synthesise jet fuel through the Fischer-Tropsch 
process or methanol synthesis. Hydrogen would be produced via 
an electrochemical process, powered by low-carbon energy and 
combined with CO 2 captured directly from the atmosphere or 
through BECCS. The energy requirement from photovoltaics has 
been estimated to be of the order 14 to 20 EJ to phase out aviation fossil fuel by 2050 (Gössling et al. 2021a). These synthetic fuels have 
potential for large lifecycle emissions reductions (Schmidt et  al. 
2016). In comparison to bio-SAF production, the implementation of 
the processes is in its infancy. However, assuming availability of low-
carbon energy electricity, these fuels have much smaller land and 
water requirements than bio-SAF . Low carbon-energy supply, scalable 
technology, and therefore costs, represent barriers. Scheelhaase et al. 
(2019) review current estimates of costs, which are estimated to be 
approximately four to six times the price of fossil kerosene.
Liquid hydrogen (LH 2) as a fuel has been discussed for aeronautical 
applications since the 1950s (Brewer 1991) and a few experimental 
aircraft have flown using such a  fuel. Experimental, small aircraft 
have also flown using hydrogen fuel cells. Although the fuel has an 
energy density per unit mass about three times greater than kerosene, 
it has a much lower energy density per unit volume (approximately 
factor 4 (McKinsey 2020)). The increased volume requirement makes 
the fuel less attractive for aviation since it would require the wings 
to be thickened or fuel to take up space in the fuselage. Bicer and 
Dincer (2017) found that LH 2-powered aircraft compared favourably 
to conventional kerosene-powered aircraft on a  lifecycle basis, 
providing that the LH 2 was generated from low-carbon energy sources 
(0.014  kgCO 2 per  tkm compared with 1.03 kgCO 2 per  tkm for an 
unspecified passenger aircraft). However, Ramos Pereira et al. (2014) 
also made a lifecycle comparison and found much smaller benefits 
of LH 2-powered aircraft (manufactured from low-carbon energy) 
compared with conventional fossil kerosene. The two studies expose 
the sensitivities of boundaries and assumptions in the analyses. 
Shreyas Harsha (2014) and Rondinelli et  al. (2017) conclude that 
there are many infrastructural barriers but that the environmental 
benefits of low-carbon-based LH 2 could be considerable. Khandelwal 
et  al. (2013) take a  more optimistic view of the prospect of 
LH2-powered aircraft but envisage them within a hydrogen-oriented 
energy economy. A recently commissioned study by the European 
Union (EU)’s Clean Sky undertaking, (McKinsey 2020) addresses 
many of the aspects of the opportunities and obstacles in developing 
LH2-powered aircraft. The report provides an optimistic view of the 
feasibility of developing such aircraft for short to medium haul but 
makes clear that new aircraft designs (such as blended-wing body 
aircraft) would be needed for longer distances.
The non-CO 2 impacts of LH 2-powered aircrafts remain poorly 
understood. The emission index of water vapour would be much larger 
(estimated to be 2.6 times greater by Ström and Gierens (2002)) than 
for conventional fuels), and the occurrence of contrails may increase 
but have lower ERF because of the lower optical depth (Marquart 
et al. 2005). Moreover, contrails primarily form on soot particles from 
kerosene-powered aircraft, which would be absent from LH 2 exhaust 
(Kärcher 2018). The overall effect is currently unknown as there are 
no measurements. Potentially, NO x emissions could be lower with 
combustor redesign (Khandelwal et al. 2013).
In conclusion, there are favourable arguments for LH 2-powered 
aircraft, both on an efficiency basis (Verstraete 2013) and an overall 
reduction in GHG emissions, even on an lifecycle basis. However, LH 2 
requires redesign of the aircraft, particularly for long-haul operations. 
Similarly, there would be a need for expanded infrastructure for fuel 
Transport  Chapter 1010
manufacture, storage, and distribution at airports, which is likely to 
be more easily overcome if there is a more general move towards 
a hydrogen-based energy economy.
Technological and operational trade-offs between CO 2 and 
non-CO 2 effects. Since aviation has additional non-CO 2 warming 
effects, there has been some discussion as to whether these can be 
addressed by either technological or operational means. For example, 
improved fuel efficiency has resulted from high overall pressure ratio 
engines with large bypass ratios. This improvement has increased 
pressure and temperature at the combustor inlet, with a  resultant 
tendency to increase thermal NO x formation in the combustor. 
Combustor technology aims to reduce this increase, but it represents 
a potential technology trade-off whereby NO x control may be at the 
expense of extra fuel efficiency. Estimating the benefits or disbenefits 
of CO 2 (proportional to fuel burned) vs NO x in terms of climate is 
complex (Freeman et al. 2018).
Any global warming potential/temperature change potential type 
emissions equivalency calculation always involves the user selection 
of a  time horizon over which the calculation is made, which is 
a subjective choice (Fuglestvedt et al. 2010). In general, the longer the 
time horizon, the more important CO 2 becomes in comparison with 
a short-lived climate forcing agent. So, for example, a net (overall) 
aviation GWP for a  20-year time horizon is 4.0 times that of CO 2 
alone, but only 1.7 over a 100-year time horizon. Correspondingly, 
a GTP for a 20-year time horizon is 1.3, but it is 1.1 for 100 years 
(Lee et al. 2021).
A widely discussed opportunity for mitigation of non-CO 2 emissions 
from aviation is the avoidance of persistent contrails that can form 
contrail cirrus. Contrails only form in ice-supersaturated air below 
a  critical temperature threshold (Kärcher 2018). It is therefore 
feasible to alter flight trajectories to avoid such areas conducive 
to contrail formation, since ice-supersaturated areas tend to be 
tens to  hundreds of kilometres in the horizontal and only a  few 

approaches show that avoidance is possible on a  flight-by-flight 
basis (Matthes et  al. 2017; Teoh et  al. 2020). Case studies have 
shown that flight planning according to trajectories with minimal 
climate impact can substantially (up to 50%) reduce the aircraft’s 
net climate impacts despite small additional CO 2 emissions (Niklaß 
et al. 2019). However, any estimate of the net benefit or disbenefit 
depends firstly on the assumed magnitude of the contrail cirrus 
ERF effect (itself rather uncertain, assessed with a  low confidence 
level) and upon the choice of metric and time horizon applied. While 
this is a potentially feasible mitigation option, notwithstanding the 
CO2 per  contrail trade-off question, meteorological models cannot 
currently predict the formation of persistent contrails with sufficient 
accuracy in time and space (Gierens et  al. 2020); this mitigation 
option is speculated to take of the order of up to a decade to mature 
(Arrowsmith et al. 2020).
Market-based offsetting measures. The EU introduced aviation 
into its CO 2 emissions trading scheme (ETS) in 2012. Currently, the 
EU-ETS for aviation includes all flights within the EU as well as to and 
from Eastern European and West-Central Asian states. Globally, ICAO agreed in 2016 to commence, in 2020, the ‘Carbon Offsetting and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation’ (CORSIA). The pandemic 
subsequently resulted in the baseline being changed to 2019.
CORSIA has a  phased implementation, with an initial pilot phase 
(2021–2023) and a  first phase (2024–2026) in which states 
will participate voluntarily. The second phase will then start in 
2026–2035, and all states will participate unless exempted. States 
may be exempted if they have lower aviation activity levels or based 
on their UN development status. As of September 2021, 109 ICAO 
Member States will voluntarily be participating in CORSIA starting 
in 2022. In terms of routes, only those where both States connecting 
the route are participating are included. There will be a  special 
review of CORSIA by the end of 2032 to determine the termination 
of the scheme, its extension, or any other changes to the scheme 
beyond 2035.
By its nature, CORSIA does not lead to a  reduction in in-sector 
emissions from aviation since the programme deals mostly in 
approved offsets. At its best, CORSIA is a transition arrangement to 
allow aviation to reduce its impact in a more meaningful way later. 
From 2021 onwards, operators can reduce their CORSIA offsetting 
requirements by claiming emissions reductions from ‘CORSIA 
Eligible Fuels’ that have demonstrably reduced lifecycle emissions. 
These fuels are currently available at greater costs than the offsets 
(Capaz et al. 2021a). As a result, most currently approved CORSIA 
offsets are avoided emissions, which raises the issue of additionality 
(Warnecke et al. 2019). The nature of avoided emissions is to prevent 
an emission that was otherwise considered to be going to occur, 
for example, prevented deforestation. Avoided emissions are 
‘reductions’ (over a counterfactual) and purchased from other sectors 
that withhold from an intended emission (Becken and Mackey 2017), 
such that if additionality were established, a maximum of 50% of 
the intended emissions are avoided. Some researchers suggest that 
avoided deforestation offsets are not a meaningful reduction, since 
deforestation continues to be a net source of CO 2 emissions (Mackey 
et al. 2013; Friedlingstein et al. 2020).
Modal shift to high-speed rail. Due to the limitations of the current 
suite of aviation mitigation strategies, the potential for high-speed 
rail (HSR) is of increasing interest (Givoni and Banister 2006; Chen 
2017; Bi et al. 2019). The IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 roadmap suggests 
significant behavioural change, with more regional flights shifting to 
HSR in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 scenario pathway (IEA 2021e). 
For HSR services to be highly competitive with air travel, the optimal 
distance between the departure and arrival points has been found 
to be in the approximate range of 400 to 800 km (Bows et al. 2008; 
Rothengatter 2010), although in the case of China’s HSR operations, 
this range can be extended out to 1000 km, with corresponding air 
services having experienced significant demand reduction upon HSR 
service commencement (Lawrence et  al. 2019). In some instances, 
negative effects on air traffic, air fare, and flight frequency have 
occurred at medium-haul distances such as HSR services in China on 
the Wuhan–Guangzhou route (1069 km) and the Beijing–Shanghai 
route (1318 km) (Fu et al. 2015; Zhang and Zhang 2016; Chen 2017; 
Li et  al. 2019; Ma et  al. 2019). This competition at medium-haul 
distances is contrary to that which has been experienced in European 
Chapter 10 Transport10and other markets and may be attributable to China having developed 
a comprehensive network with hub stations, higher average speeds, 
and an integrated domestic market with strong patronage (Zhang 
et al. 2019a).
The LCA literature suggests that the GHG emissions associated with 
HSR vary depending on spatial, temporal, and operational specifics 
(Åkerman 2011; Baron et al. 2011; Chester and Horvath 2012; Yue 
et  al. 2015; Hoyos et  al. 2016; Jones et  al. 2017; Robertson 2016; 
Robertson 2018; Lin et al. 2019). These studies found a wide range of 
approximately 10 to 110 gCO 2 pkm–1 for HSR. This range is principally 
attributable to the sensitivity of operational parameters such as the 
HSR passenger seating capacity, load factor, composition of renewable 
and non-renewable energy sources in electricity production, rolling 
stock energy efficiency and patronage (i.e.,  ridership both actual 
and forecast), and line-haul infrastructure specifics (e.g., tunnelling 
and aerial structure requirements for a particular corridor) (Åkerman 
2011; Chester and Horvath 2012; Yue et  al. 2015; Newman et  al. 
2018; Robertson 2018). The prospect for HSR services providing 
freight carriage (especially online purchases) is also growing rapidly 
(Strale 2016; Bi et al. 2019; Liang and Tan 2019) with a demonstrated 
emissions reduction potential from such operations (Hoffrichter 
et al. 2012). However, additional supportive policies will most likely 
be required (Strale 2016; Watson et  al. 2019). Limiting emissions 
avoidance assessments for HSR modal substitution to account only 
for CO 2 emissions ignores aviation’s non-CO 2 effects (Section 10.5.2), 
and likely results in an under-representation of the climate benefits 
of HSR replacing flights.
HSR modal substitution can generate a contra-effect if the air traffic 
departure and arrival slots that become available as the result of the 
modal shift are simply reallocated to additional air services (Givoni and 
Banister 2006; Givoni and Dobruszkes 2013; Jiang and Zhang 2016; 
Cornet et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a). Furthermore, HSR services have 
the potential to increase air traffic at a hub airport through improved 
networks but this effect can vary based on the distance of the HSR 
stations from airports (Jiang and Zhang 2014; Xia and Zhang 2016; 
Zhang et  al. 2019b; Liu et  al. 2019). Such rebound effects could be 
managed through policy interventions. For example, in 2021 the French 
government regulated that all airlines operating in France suspend 
domestic airline flights on routes if a direct rail alternative with a travel 
time of less than 2.5 hours is available. Other air travel demand 
reduction measures that have been proposed include regulations to 
ban frequent flyer reward schemes, mandates that all marketing of air 
travel declare flight emissions information to the prospective consumer 
(i.e., the carbon footprint of the nominated flight), the introduction of 
a progressive ‘Air Miles Levy’ as well as the inclusion of all taxes and 
duties that are presently exempt from air ticketing (Carmichael 2019). 
Moreover, China has the highest use of HSR in the world in part due to 
its network and competitive speeds and in part due to heavy regulation 
of the airline industry, in particular restrictions imposed on low-cost air 
carrier entry and subsidisation of HSR (Li et al. 2019). These air travel 
demand reduction strategies may induce shifts to other alternative 
modes in addition to stimulating HSR ridership.
Despite the risk of a rebound effect, and due to the probable reality 
of an incremental adoption of sustainable aviation fuel technology in the coming decades, the commencement of appropriate HSR services 
has the potential to provide, particularly in the short- to medium-
term, additional means of aviation emissions mitigation.
10.5.4 Assessment of Aviation-specific Projections 
and Scenarios
The most recent projection from ICAO (prior to the COVID-19 
pandemic) for international traffic (mid-range growth) is shown in 
Figure 10.11. This projection shows the different contributions of 
mitigation measures from two levels of improved technology, as 
well as improvements in air traffic management and infrastructure 
use. The projections indicate an increase in CO 2 emissions by 
a  factor of 2.2 in 2050 over 2020 levels for the most optimistic 
set of mitigation assumptions. The high/low traffic growth 
assumptions would indicate increases by factors of 2.8 and 1.1, 
respectively in 2050, over 2020 levels (again, for the most optimistic 
mitigation assumptions).
The International Energy Agency has published several long-term 
aviation scenarios since AR5 within a  broader scope of energy 
projections. Their first set of aviation scenarios include a ‘reference 
technology scenario’, a ‘2°C Scenario’ and a ‘Beyond 2°C Scenario’. 
The scenarios are simplified in assuming a range of growth rates and 
technological/operational improvements (IEA 2017b). Mitigation 
measures brought about by policy and regulation are treated in 
a broad-brush manner, noting possible uses of taxes, carbon pricing, 
price and regulatory signals to promote innovation.
The IEA has more recently presented aviation scenarios to 2070 in 
their ‘Sustainable Development Scenario’ that assume some limited 
reduction in demand post-COVID-19, and potential technology 
improvements in addition to direct reductions in fossil kerosene 
usage from substitution of biofuels and synthetic fuels (IEA 2021b). 
There is much uncertainty in how aviation will recover from the 
COVID-19 pandemic but, in this scenario, air travel returns to 2019 
levels in three years, and then continues to expand, driven by income. 
Government policies could dampen demand (12% lower by 2040 
than the IEA ‘Stated Policies Scenario’, which envisages growth at 
3.4% per year, which in turn is lower than ICAO at 4.3%). Mitigation 
takes place largely by fuel substitution with lower-carbon biofuels 
and synthetic fuels, with a  smaller contribution from technology. 
Approximately 85% of the actual cumulative CO 2 emissions (to 2070) 
are attributed to use of fuel at their lowest technology readiness level 
of ‘Prototype’, which is largely made up of biofuels and synthetic 
fuels, as shown in Figure 10.12. Details of the technological scenarios 
and the fuel availability/uptake assumptions are given in IEA (2021b), 
which also makes clear that the relevant policies are not currently in 
place to make any such scenario happen.
Within the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 
emissions database, a  range of aviation emissions scenarios for 
a  range of Shared Socio-economic Pathway (SSP) scenarios are 
available (Figure  10.13). This Figure suggests that by 2050, direct 
emissions from aviation could be 1.5 to 6.5 (5–95th percentile) 
times higher than in the 2020 model year under the scenarios that 
Transport  Chapter 1010
Additional contribution of technology improvements
Range of 2020 CO2Additional contribution of improved air trafﬁc management 
and infrastructure use
2,000CO2 emissions from international aviation (MtCO2 yr–1)1,750
1,500
1,250
1,000


Year2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 20500
Extrapolation
beyond 2045Extrapolation
beyond 2045CAEP/11 baseline including ﬂeet renewal
Low aircraft technology scenario
Figure 10.11 | Projections of international aviation emissions of CO 2. Data in Mt yr –1, to 2050, showing contributions of improved technology and 
air traffic management and infrastructure use to emissions reductions to 2050.  Data from Fleming and de Lépinay (2019); projections made pre-COVID-19 
global pandemic.
Figure 10.12 | The International Energy Agency’s scenario of future aviation fuel consumption for the States Policies Scenario (‘STEPS’) and composition 
of aviation fuel use in the Sustainable Development Scenario.  Source: adapted from IEA (2021b).
Chapter 10 Transport10
exceed warming of 4°C during the 21st century with a likelihood of 
50% or greater (C8). In the C1 (which limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) 
during the 2st century with no or limited overshoot) and C2 (which 
return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 2st century after a high 
overshoot) scenarios, aviation emissions could still be up to 2.5 times 
higher in 2050 than in the 2020 model year (95th percentile) but may 
need to decrease by 10% by 2050 (5th percentile).
The COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 has changed many activities and, 
consequentially, associated emissions quite dramatically (Le Quéré 
et al. 2018b; Friedlingstein et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020c; UNEP 2020). 
Aviation was particularly affected, with a  reduction in commercial 
flights in April 2020 of about 74% over 2019 levels, with some 
recovery over the following months, remaining at 42% lower as of 
October 2020 (Petchenik 2021). The industry is considering a range 
of potential recovery scenarios, with the International Air Transport 
Association (IATA) speculating that recovery to 2019 levels may take 
up until 2024 (Earley and Newman 2021) (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in 
Chapter 1). Others suggest, however, that the COVID-19 pandemic 
and increased costs as a  result of feed-in quotas or carbon taxes 
could slow down the rate of growth of air travel demand, though 
global demand in 2050 would still grow 57%–187% between 2018 
and 2050 (instead of 250% in a baseline recovery scenario) (Gössling 
et al. 2021a).10.5.5 Accountability and Governance Options
Under Article 2.2 of the Kyoto Protocol, Annex I countries were 
called to ‘…pursue limitation or reduction of emissions of GHGs not 
controlled by the Montreal Protocol from aviation and marine bunker 
fuels, working through the International Civil Aviation Organization 
and the International Maritime Organization, respectively.’ The Paris 
Agreement is different, in that ICAO (and the IMO) are not named. 
As a result, the Paris Agreement, through the NDCs, seemingly covers 
CO2 emissions from domestic aviation (currently 35% of the global 
total from aviation) but does not cover emissions from international 
flights. A number of states and regions, including the UK, France, 
Sweden, and Norway, have declared their intentions to include 
international aviation in their net zero commitments, while the EU, 
New Zealand, California, and Denmark are considering doing the 
same (Committee on Climate Change 2019). The Paris Agreement 
describes temperature-based goals, such that it is unclear how 
emissions of GHGs from international aviation would be accounted 
for. Clearly, this is a less than ideal situation for clarity of governance 
of international GHG emissions from both aviation and shipping. At 
its 40th General Assembly (October 2019) the ICAO requested its 
Council to ‘…continue to explore the feasibility of a long-term global 
aspirational goal for international aviation, through conducting 
detailed studies assessing the attainability and impacts of any goals 
proposed, including the impact on growth as well as costs in all 
Model/scenarioDirect transport CO2 emissions from shipping [Index, 2020 level = 1.0]
IAM C1: 1.5°C (>50%) low overshoot
IAM C3: limit warming to 2°C (>67%) IAM C4: limit warming to 2°C (>50%)IAM C2: 1.5°C (>50%) high overshoot
IAM C5: limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%)
IAM C7: limit warming to 4°C (>50%) IAM C8: Exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%)IAM C6: limit warming to 3°C (>50%)
0.00.51.01.52.0

Figure 10.13 | CO 2 emissions from AR6 aviation scenarios indexed to 2020 modelled year.  Data from the AR6 scenario database.
Transport  Chapter 1010
countries, especially developing countries, for the progress of the 
work to be presented to the 41st Session of the ICAO Assembly’. 
What form this goal will take is unclear until work is presented to 
the 41st Assembly (Autumn, 2022). It is likely, however, that new 
accountability and governance structures will be needed to support 
decarbonisation of the aviation sector.
10.6 Decarbonisation of Shipping
Maritime transport is considered one of the key cornerstones 
enabling globalisation (Kumar and Hoffmann 2002). But as for 
aviation, shipping has its challenges in decarbonisation, with a strong 
dependency on fossil fuels without major changes since AR5. At 
the same time, the sector has a  range of opportunities that could 
help reduce emissions through not only changing fuels, but also by 
increasing energy efficiency, optimising operations and ship design, 
reducing demand, improving regulations, as well as other options 
that will be reviewed in this section.
10.6.1 Historical and Current Emissions from Shipping
Maritime transport volume has increased by 250% over the past 

goods in 2018 (UNCTAD 2019). This growth in transport volumes has 
resulted in continued growth in GHG emissions from the shipping 
sector, despite an improvement in the carbon intensity of ship 
operations, especially since 2014. The estimated total emissions 
from maritime transport can vary depending on data set and 
calculation method, but range over 600–1100 MtCO 2 yr –1 over 
the past decade (Figure  10.14), corresponding to 2–3% of total 
anthropogenic emissions. The legend in Figure  10.14 refers to the 
following data sources: Endresen et al. (2003), Eyring et al. (2005), Dalsøren et  al.  (2009), DNV GL (DNV GL 2019), CAMS-GLOB-SHIP 
(Jalkanen et al. 2014; Granier et al. 2019), EDGAR (Crippa et al. 2019), 
Hoesly et al. (2018), Johansson et al. (2017), ICCT (Olmer et al. 2017), 
the IMO GHG Studies; IMO 2nd (Buhaug et al. 2009), IMO 3rd (Smith 
et al. 2014), IMO 4th-vessel and IMO 4th-voyage (Faber et al. 2020), 
and Kramel et al. (2021).
10.6.2 Short-lived Climate Forcers and Shipping
Like aviation, shipping is also a  source of emissions of SLCFs as 
described in Section 10.5, including nitrogen oxides (NO x), sulphur 
oxides (SO x, such as SO 2 and SO 4), carbon monoxide (CO), black 
carbon, and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs) 
(Szopa et  al. 2021). Though SLCF have a  shorter lifetime than the 
associated CO 2 emissions, these short-lived forcers can have both 
a cooling effect (e.g., SO x) or a warming effect (e.g., ozone from NO x). 
The cooling from the SLCF from a pulse emission will decay rapidly 
and diminish after a couple of decades, while the warming from the 
long-lived substances lasts for centuries (Szopa et al. 2021).
Emissions of SLCF from shipping not only affect the climate, but 
also the environment, air quality, and human health. Maritime 
transport has been shown to be a major contributor to coastal air 
quality degradation (Zhao et  al. 2013; Jalkanen et  al. 2014; Viana 
et al. 2014; Goldsworthy and Goldsworthy 2015; Goldsworthy 2017). 
Sulphur emissions may contribute towards acidification of the ocean 
(Hassellöv et al. 2013). Furthermore, increases in sulphur deposition 
on the oceans have also been shown to increase the flux of CO 2 
from the oceans to the atmosphere (Hassellöv et al. 2013). To address 
the risks of SO x emissions from shipping, there is now a cap on the on 
the sulphur content permissible in marine fuels (IMO 2013). There is 
also significant uncertainty about the impacts of pollutants emitted 
from ships on the marine environment (Blasco et al. 2014).
Historical CO2 emissions from shippingCO2 emissions [Mt yr–1]
2002Endresen et al. (2003)
Eyring et al. (2005)
Dalsøren et al. (2009)
DNV-GL
CAMS-GLOB-SHIP
EDGAR
Hoesly et al. (2018)
Johansson et al. (2017)
ICCT
IMO 2nd
IMO 3rd
IMO 4th-vessel
IMO 4th-voyage
Kramel et al. (2021)
02004006008001,0001,2001,400

Figure 10.14 | CO 2 emissions (Mt yr –1) from shipping 2000–2018.  Data from various inventories as shown in the label.
Chapter 10 Transport10Pollution control is implemented to varying degrees in the modelling 
of the SSP scenarios (Rao et  al. 2017); for example, SSPs 1 and 5 
assume that increasing concern for health and the environment result 
in more stringent air pollution policies than today (Szopa et al. 2021). 
There is a downward trend in SO x and NO x emissions from shipping 
in all the SSPs, in compliance with regulations. The SLCF emissions 
reduction efforts, within the maritime sector, are also contributing 
towards achieving the UN SDGs. In essence, while long-lived GHGs 
are important for long-term mitigation targets, accounting for short-
lived climate forcers is important both for current and near-term 
forcing levels as well as broader air pollution and SDG implications.
10.6.3 Shipping in the Arctic
Shipping in the Arctic is a topic of increasing interest. The reduction 
of Arctic summer sea ice increases the access to the northern sea 
routes (Smith and Stephenson 2013; Melia et al. 2016; Aksenov et al. 
2017; Fox-Kemper et al. 2021). Literature and public discourse has 
sometimes portrayed this trend as positive (Zhang et al. 2016b), as 
it allows for shorter shipping routes, for example between Asia and 
Europe, with estimated travel time savings of 25–40% (Aksenov 
et al. 2017). However, the acceleration of Arctic cryosphere melt and 
reduced sea ice that enable Arctic shipping reduce surface albedo 
and amplify climate warming (Eyring et al. 2021). Furthermore, local 
air pollutants can play different roles in the Arctic. For example, black 
carbon emissions reduce albedo and absorb heat in air, on snow 
and ice (Browse et al. 2013; Kang et al. 2020; Messner 2020; Eyring 
et  al. 2021). Finally, changing routing from Suez to the northern 
sea routes may reduce total emissions for a voyage, but also shifts 
emissions from low to high latitudes. Changing the location of the 
emissions adds complexity to the assessment of the climatic impacts 
of Arctic shipping, as the local conditions are different and the SLCF 
may have a  different impact on clouds, precipitation, albedo and 
local environment (Dalsøren et  al. 2013; Fuglestvedt et  al. 2014; 
Marelle et  al. 2016). Observations have shown that 5–25% of air 
pollution in the Arctic stems from shipping activity within the Arctic 
itself (Aliabadi et al. 2015). Emissions outside the Arctic can affect 
Arctic climate, and changes within the Arctic may have global climate 
impacts. Both modelling and observations have shown that aerosol 
emissions from shipping can have a significant effect on air pollution 
and shortwave radiative forcing (Ødemark et al. 2012; Peters et al. 
2012; Dalsøren et  al. 2013; Roiger et  al. 2014; Righi et  al. 2015; 
Marelle et al. 2016).
Increased Arctic shipping activity may also pose increased risks to 
local marine ecosystems and coastal communities from invasive 
species, underwater noise, and pollution (Halliday et al. 2017; IPCC 
2019). Greater levels of Arctic maritime transport and tourism 
have political, as well as socio-economic, implications for trade, 
and nations and economies reliant on the traditional shipping 
corridors. There has been an increase in activity from cargo, tankers, 
supply, and fishing vessels in particular (Winther et al. 2014; Zhao 
et  al. 2015). Projections indicate more navigable Arctic waters in 
the coming decades (Smith and Stephenson 2013; Melia et  al. 
2016) and continued increases in transport volumes through the 
northern sea routes (Corbett et al. 2010; Lasserre and Pelletier 2011; Winther  et  al.  2014). Emission patterns and quantities, however, 
are also likely to change with future regulations from IMO, and 
depend on technology developments, and activity levels which may 
depend upon geopolitics, commodity pricing, trade, natural resource 
extraction, insurance costs, taxes, and tourism demand (Johnston 
et al. 2017). The need to include indigenous peoples’ voices when 
shaping policies and governance of shipping activities in the high 
north is increasing (Dawson et al. 2020).
The Arctic climate and environment pose unique hazards and 
challenges with regard to safe and efficient shipping operations: low 
temperature challenges, implications for vessel design, evacuation 
and rescue systems, communications, oil spills, variable sea ice, and 
meteorological conditions (Buixadé Farré et al. 2014). To understand 
the total implications of shipping in the Arctic, including its climate 
impacts, a  holistic view of synergies, trade-offs, and co-benefits is 
needed, with assessments of impacts on not only the physical climate, 
but also the local environment and ecosystems. To further ensure safe 
operations in the Arctic waters, close monitoring of activities may 
be valuable.
10.6.4 Mitigation Potential of Fuels, Operations 
and Energy Efficiency
A range of vessel mitigation options for the international fleet 
exist and are presented in this section. A variety of feedstocks and 
energy carriers can be considered for shipping. As feedstocks, fuels 
from biomass (advanced biofuels), fuels produced from renewable 
electricity and CO 2 capture from flue gas or the air (electro-, e-, or 
power-fuels), and fuels produced via thermochemical processes 
(solar fuels) can be considered. As energy carriers, synthetic fuels 
and the direct use of electricity (stored in batteries) are of relevance. 
The most prominent synthetic fuels discussed in the literature are 
hydrogen, ammonia, methane, methanol, and synthetic hydrocarbon 
diesel. Figure  10.15 shows the emissions reductions potential for 
alternative energy carriers that have been identified as having the 
highest potential to mitigate operational emissions from the sector 
(Chatzinikolaou and Ventikos 2014; Brynolf et al. 2014; Teeter and 
Cleary 2014; Traut et al. 2014; Lindstad et al. 2015; Psaraftis 2015; 
Seddiek 2015; Tillig et al. 2015; Winkel et al. 2016; DNV GL 2017; 
Bicer and Dincer 2018a; Biernacki et  al. 2018; Bongartz et  al. 
2018; Gilbert et al. 2018; Hua et al. 2018; ITF 2018b; Singh et al. 2018; 
Balcombe  et  al. 2019; Hansson et  al. 2019; Sharafian et  al. 2019; 
Winebrake et  al. 2019; Czermański et  al. 2020; Faber et  al. 2020; 
Hansson et al. 2020; Kim et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020a; Nguyen et al. 
2020; Perčić et al. 2020; Sadeghi et al. 2020; Seithe et al. 2020; Xing 
et al. 2020; Valente et al. 2021; Stolz et al. 2021).
Low-carbon hydrogen and ammonia are seen to have positive potential 
as a  decarbonised shipping fuel. Hydrogen and ammonia, when 
produced from renewables or coupled to CCS as opposed to mainly 
by fossil fuels with high lifecycle emissions (Bhandari et  al. 2014), 
may contribute to significant CO 2-eq reductions of up to 70–80% 
compared to low-sulphur heavy fuel oil (Bicer and Dincer 2018b; 
Gilbert et al. 2018). These fuels have their own unique transport and 
storage challenges as ammonia requires a pilot fuel due to difficulty 
Transport  Chapter 1010
in combustion, and ammonia combustion could lead to elevated 
levels of NO x, N2O, or NH 3 emissions depending on engine technology 
used (DNV GL 2020). There is a need for the further development of 
technology and procedures for safe storage and handling of fuels 
such as hydrogen and ammonia, both onboard and onshore, for faster 
uptake (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2019), but they remain an encouraging 
decarbonisation option for shipping in the next decade.
While methanol produced from fossil sources induces an emissions 
increase of +7.5% (+44%), e-methanol (via hydrogen from 
electrolysis based on renewable energy and carbon from direct 
air capture) reduces emissions by 80% (82%). In general, several 
synthetic fuels, such as synthetic diesel, methane, methanol, ethanol, 
and dimethyl ether could in principle be used for shipping (Horvath 
et al. 2018). The mitigation potential of these is fully dependent on 
the sourcing of the hydrogen and carbon required for their synthesis.
As noted in Section 10.3, LNG has been found to have a relatively 
limited mitigation potential and may not be viewed as a low-carbon 
alternative, but has a  higher availability than other fuel options 
(Gilbert et al. 2018). Emissions reductions across the full fuel lifecycle 
are found in the order of 10%, with ranges reported from –30% 
(reduction) to +8% (increase), if switching from heavy fuel oil to LNG, 
as indicated in Figure 10.15 (Bengtsson et al. 2011). Regardless of the 
production pathway, the literature points to the risk of methane slip 
(emissions of unburnt methane especially at low engine loads and 
from transport to ports) from LNG-fuelled vessels, with no current 
regulation on emissions caps (Anderson et al. 2015; Ushakov et al. 
2019; Peng et al. 2020). Leakage rates are a critical point for the total 
climate impact of LNG as a fuel, where high pressure engines remedy 
this more than low pressure ones. As discussed in Section 10.3, some 
consider LNG as a  transition fuel, while some literature points to 
the risk of stranded assets due to the increasing decarbonisation 
regulation from IMO and the challenge of meeting IMO’s 2030 
emissions reductions targets using this fuel.
In addition to fossil and e-fuels, advanced biofuels might play a role to 
provide the energy demand for future shipping. Biomass is presently 
used to produce alcohol fuels (such as ethanol and methanol), liquid 
biogas, or biodiesel that can be used for shipping and could reduce 
CO2 emissions from this segment. As explained in Box  10.2 and 
Chapter  7, the GHG footprint associated with biofuels is strongly 
dependent on the incurred land use and land-use change emissions. 
Advanced biofuels from processing cellulose rather than sugar are 
likely to be more attractive in terms of the quantities required but 
are not commercially available (Section  10.3). The estimates of 
emissions reductions from biofuels shown in Figure  10.15 rely on 
data from the Integrated Assessment Models  – Energy Modelling 
Forum 33 (IAM EMF33), partial models assuming constant land cover 
(CLC), and partial models using natural growth (NRG). Box 10.2 and 
Section 10.4 include a more detailed description of the assumptions 
underlying these models and their estimates. The results based on 
IAM EMF33 and CLC suggests median mitigation potential of around 
73% for advanced biofuels in shipping, while the NRG-based results 
suggest increased emissions from biofuels. The EMF33 and CLC 
results rely on modelling approaches compatible with the scenarios 
in the AR6 database (Chapter 6 and Box 7.7).In addition to fuels, there are other measures that may aid the 
transition to low-carbon shipping. The amounts and speed of uptake 
of alternative low- or zero-carbon fuels in ports depend upon 
investments in infrastructure  – including bunkering infrastructure, 
refinery readiness, reliable supply of the fuels, as well as sustainable 
production. The ship lifetime and age also play a  role; retrofitting 
ships to accommodate engines and fuel systems for new fuel types 
may not be an option for older vessels. As such, operational efficiency 
becomes more important (Bullock et  al. 2020). There is some 
potential to continue to improve the energy efficiency of vessels 
through operational changes (Traut et al. 2018), reducing the speed 
or ‘slow steaming’ (Bullock et al. 2020), and improved efficiency in 
port operations (Viktorelius and Lundh 2019; Poulsen and Sampson 
2020). There is also a growing interest in onboard technologies for 
capturing carbon, with prototype ships underway showing 65–90% 
potential reduction in CO 2 emissions (Luo and Wang 2017; Awoyomi 
et al. 2020; Japan Ship Technology Research Association et al. 2020). 
Challenges identified include CO 2 capture efficiency (Zhou and Wang 
2014), increased operating costs, and limited onboard power supply 
(Fang et  al. 2019). Furthermore, designing CO 2 storage tanks for 
transport to shore may pose a challenge, as the volume and weight 
of captured CO 2 could be up to four times more than standard oil 
(Decarre et al. 2010).
Changes in design and engineering provide potential for reducing 
emissions from shipping through a range of measures, for example 
by optimising hull design and vessel shape, power and propulsion 
systems that include wind- or solar-assisted propulsion, and through 
improved operations of vessels and ports. Figure 10.15 shows that 
such measures may decrease emissions by 5–40%, though with 
a broad range in potential (Bouman et al. 2017). Nuclear propulsion 
could decrease emissions from individual vessels by 98%. Battery- 
or hybrid-electric ships have been identified as a means to reduce 
emissions in short-sea shipping such as ferries and inland waterways 
(Gagatsi et  al. 2016), which may also importantly reduce near-
shore SLCF pollution (Nguyen et al. 2020). Figure 10.15 shows that 
the median emissions from electric ships can be about 40% lower 
than equivalent fossil-based vessels but can vary widely. The wide 
reduction potential of battery electric propulsion is due to different 
assumptions about the CO 2 intensity of the electricity used and the 
levels of CO 2 footprints associated with battery production.
Although projections indicate continued increase in freight demand 
in the future, demand-side reductions could contribute to mitigation. 
The development of autonomous systems may play a role (Colling 
and Hekkenberg 2020; Liu et al. 2021) while 3-D printing can reduce 
all forms of freight as parts and products can be printed instead of 
shipped (UNCTAD 2018). As more than 40% of transported freight is 
fossil fuels, a lessened demand for such products in low-emissions 
scenarios should contribute to reducing the overall maritime transport 
needs and hence emissions in the future (Sharmina et  al. 2017). 
An  increase in alternative fuels, on the other hand, may increase 
freight demand (Mander et  al. 2012). Potentials for demand-side 
reduction in shipping emissions may arise from improving processes 
around logistics and packaging, and further taxes and charges could 
serve as leverage for reducing demand and emissions.
Chapter 10 Transport10
Emissions scope of individual data points BoxplotsAdvanced biofuels (EMF33 | Partial models CLC | Partial models NRG) Nuclear (n=6)
Battery electric (n=9)
Shore-side electricity (n=32)
Wind assistance (n=29)
Solar assistance (n=7)Methanol (left: e-fuel; right: fossil; n=22)
Methane (left: e-fuel; right: fossil; n=35)
Hydrogen (left: e-fuel; right: fossil; n=43)
Ammonia (left: e-fuel; right: fossil; n=29)
MedianOutliers95% percentile
InterquartilesTank-to-wake, CO2
Well-to-wake, CO2 Well-to-Wake, CO2-eqTank-To-Wake, CO2-eq
–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
Emission reduction in % Emission increase in %LCA, CO2-eq–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
–100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100
Figure 10.15 | Emissions reductions potential of alternative fuels compared to conventional fuels in the shipping sector.  The x-axis is reported in %. Each 
individual marker represents a data point from the literature, where the brown square indicates a full LCA CO 2-eq value; light blue triangles tank-to-wake CO 2-eq; red triangles 
well-to-wake CO 2-eq; yellow triangles well-to-wake CO 2; and dark blue circles tank-to-wake CO 2 emissions reduction potentials. The values in the Figure rely on the 100-year 
GWP value embedded in the source data, which may differ slightly with the updated 100-year GWP values from WGI. ‘n’ indicates the number of data points per sub-panel. Grey 
shaded boxes represent data where the energy comes from fossil resources, and blue from low-carbon renewable energy sources. ‘Advanced biofuels EMF33’ refers to emissions 
factors derived from simulation results from the integrated assessment models EMF33 scenarios (darkest coloured box in top left panel). Biofuels partial models CLC refers to 
partial models with constant land cover. Biofuels partial models NRG refers to partial models with natural regrowth. For ammonia and hydrogen, low-carbon fuel is produced 
via electrolysis using low-carbon electricity, and ‘fossil’ refers to fuels produced via steam methane reforming of natural gas.
Transport  Chapter 1010
The coming decade is projected to be costly for the shipping sector, 
as it is preparing to meet the 2030 and 2050 emissions reduction 
targets set by the IMO (UNCTAD 2018). With enough investments, 
incentives, and regulation, substantial reductions of CO 2 emissions 
from shipping could be achieved through alternative energy carriers. 
The literature suggests that their cost could be manyfold higher 
than for conventional fuels, which in itself could reduce demand 
for shipping, and hence its emissions, but could make the transition 
difficult. R&D may help reduce these costs. The literature points to the 
need for developing technology roadmaps for enabling the maritime 
transport sector to get on to pathways for decarbonisation early 
enough to reach global goals (Kuramochi et  al. 2018). Accounting 
for the full lifecycle emissions of the vessels and the fuels is required 
to meet the overall long-term objectives of cutting GHG and SLCF 
emissions. The urgency of implementing measures for reducing 
emissions is considered to be high, considering the lifetime of vessels 
is typically 20 years, if not more.
10.6.5 Accountability and Governance Options
Regulatory frameworks for the shipping sector have been developed 
over time and will continue to be through bodies such as the IMO, 
which was established by the UN to manage international shipping. 
The IMO strategy involves a 50% reduction in GHG emissions from 
international shipping by 2050 compared to 2008 (IMO 2018). The 
strategy includes a  reduction in carbon intensity of international 
shipping by at least 40% by 2030, and 70% by 2050, compared 
to 2008. IMO furthermore aims for the sectoral phase-out of GHG 
emissions as soon as possible this century.
In 2020, the IMO approved the short-term goal-based measure 
to reduce the carbon intensity of existing international vessels. 
This  measure addresses both technical and operational strategies. 
The operational element is represented by a  Carbon Intensity 
Indicator (CII), and the technical element is represented by the Energy 
Efficiency Existing Ship Index (EEXI), which will apply to ships from 
2023. The EEXI builds upon the Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI), 
which is a legally-binding mitigation regulation for newbuild ships, 
established as a series of baselines for the amount of fuel ships may 
burn for a particular cargo-carrying capacity. The EEDI differs per ship 
segment. For example, ships built in 2022 and beyond should be 
50% more energy efficient than those built in 2013. This legislation 
aims to reduce GHG emissions in particular. Energy efficiency may 
be improved by several of the mitigation options outlined above. 
The Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan (SEEMP) is seen as the 
international governance instrument to improve energy efficiency and 
hence emissions from ships. SEEMP is a measure to enable changes 
to operational measures and retrofits (see Johnson et al. 2013). The 
combination of EEXI, EEDI, and SEEMP may reduce emissions by 
23% by 2030 compared to a ‘no policy’ scenario (Sims et al. 2014). 
With regards to accountability, it is mandatory for ships greater than 
or equal to 5000 gross tonnage to collect fuel consumption data, 
as well as specified data. Such as for transport work. Similarly, 
the EU Monitoring, Reporting and Verification Regulation requires 
mandatory reporting of a vessel’s fuel consumption when operating 
in European waters.Policy choices may enable or hinder changes, and gaps in governance 
structures may, to some degree, hinder the objectives of mechanisms 
like SEEMP to improve energy efficiency and emissions. Policies 
may be developed to incentivise investments in necessary changes 
to the global fleet and related infrastructures. The literature argues 
that regulations and incentives that motivate mitigation through 
speed optimisation, ship efficiency improvements, and retrofits with 
lower-carbon technologies at a sub-global scale may contribute to 
immediate reductions in CO 2 emissions from the sector (Bows-Larkin 
2015). The role of the financial sector, through initiatives such as 
the Poseidon Principle, which limit lending to companies that fail 
to uphold environmental standards, could also become increasingly 
important (Sumaila et al. 2021).
It has been proposed to make shipping corporations accountable 
for their emissions by making it mandatory to disclose their vessels’ 
emissions reductions (Rahim et al. 2016). Market-based mechanisms 
may increasingly encourage ship operators to comply with IMO 
GHG regulations. Development of policies such as carbon pricing 
or taxation to enable a business case for adopting low-carbon fuels 
could be a near-term priority for acceleration of transformation of the 
sector (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2019). The EU is considering including 
shipping in its carbon trading system, with the details still to be 
agreed upon but expected to come into force in 2023, along with the 
CII. The proposition is that shipowners who conduct voyages within 
Europe, or start or end at an EU port, will have to pay for carbon 
permits to cover the CO 2 emitted by their vessel.
Regulations exist also to limit emissions of air pollution from shipping 
with the aim to improve environment and health impacts from 
shipping in ports and coastal communities. In sulphur emission control 
areas (SECAs), the maximum permissible sulphur content in marine 
fuels is 0.10% mass/mass. These are further tightened by the IMO 
legislation on reducing marine fuel sulphur content to a maximum 
of 0.5% in 2020 outside SECAs, compared to 3.5% permissible since 

emissions of ozone-depleting substances and ozone precursors, 
NOx, and volatile organic compounds from tankers (Mertens et  al. 
2018). The implementation of the emission control areas have been 
shown to reduce the impacts on health and the environment (Viana 
et al. 2015).
While there are many governance and regulatory initiatives that help 
reduce emissions from the shipping sector, few are transformative 
on their own, unless zero-carbon fuels can become available at 
a reasonable cost as suggested in Sections 10.3 and below.
10.6.6 Transformation Trajectories for 
the Maritime Sector
Figure 10.16 shows CO 2 emissions from shipping in scenarios from 
the AR6 database and the Fourth GHG study by the IMO (Faber et al. 
2020). Panel (a) shows that CO 2 emissions from shipping go down by 
33–70% (5–95th% percentile) by 2050 in the C1 and C2 scenarios, 
which limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st century with 
no or limited overshoot or return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during 
Chapter 10 Transport10
the 21st century after a high overshoot. By 2080, median values for 
the same set of scenarios reach net zero CO 2 emissions. IAMs often 
do not report emissions pathways for shipping transport and the 
sector is underrepresented in most IAMs (Esmeijer et al. 2020). Hence 
pathways established outside IAMs can be different for the sector. 
Indeed, the IMO projections for growth in transport demand (Faber 
et al. 2020) indicate increases of 40–100% by 2050 for the global 
fleet. Faber and et al. (2020), at the same time predict reductions in 
trade for fossil fuels dependent on decarbonisation trajectories. The 
energy efficiency improvements of the vessels in these scenarios are 
typically of 20–30%. This offsets some of the increases from higher 
demand in the future scenarios. Fuels assessed by the Fourth IMO 
GHG study were limited to heavy fuel oil, marine gasoil, LNG, and 
methanol, with a fuels mix ranging from 91–98% conventional fuel 
use and a small remainder of alternative fuels (primarily LNG and 
some methanol). Panel (b) shows average fleetwide emissions of CO 2 
based on these aggregate growth and emissions trajectories from 
the IMO scenarios. In these scenarios, CO 2 emissions from shipping 
remain stable or grow compared to 2020 modelled levels. These 
results contrast with the low emissions trajectories in the C1–C2 bin 
in panel (a). It seems evident that the scenarios in the AR6 database 
explore a  broader solutions space for the sector than the Fourth 
GHG study by the IMO. However, the 1.5°C–2°C warming goal has 
led to an IMO 2050 target of 40% reduction in carbon intensity 
by 2030, which would require emissions reduction efforts to begin 
immediately. Results from global models suggest the solutions space 
for deep emissions reductions in shipping is available.
Combinations of measures are likely to be needed for transformative 
transitioning of the shipping sector to a low-carbon future, particularly 
if an expected increase in demand for shipping services is realised 
(Smith et al. 2014; Faber et al. 2020). Both GHG and SLCF emissions 
decrease significantly in SSP1-1.9, where mitigation is achieved in the most sustainable way (Rao et al. 2017). Conversely, there are no 
emissions reductions in the scenarios presented by the IMO Fourth 
GHG study, even though these scenarios incorporate some efficiency 
improvements and a slight increase in the use of LNG.
Options outlined in this chapter suggest a combination of policies 
to reduce demand, increase investments by private actors and 
governments, and develop the technology readiness level of 
alternative fuels and related infrastructure (especially synthetic 
fuels). Some literature suggests that battery electric-powered short-
distance sea shipping could yield emissions reductions given access 
to low-carbon electricity. For deep sea shipping, advanced biofuels, 
hydrogen, ammonia, and synthetic fuels hold potential for significant 
emissions reductions, depending on GHG characteristics of the fuel 
chain and resource base. Other options, such as optimisation of 
speed and hull design and wind-assisted ships, could also combine 
to make significant contributions by 2050 to further bring emissions 
down. In total a suite of mitigation options exists or is on the horizon 
for the maritime sector.
10.7 Scenarios from Integrated, Sectoral, 
and Regional Models
10.7.1 Transport Scenario Modelling
This section reviews the results of three types of models that 
systemically combine options to assess different approaches to 
generating decarbonisation pathways for the transport system: 
(i) integrated assessment models (IAM); (ii) global transport energy 
models (GTEM); and (iii) national transport-energy models (NTEM) 
(Edelenbosch et  al. 2017; Yeh et  al. 2017). Common assumptions 
across the three model types include trajectories of socioeconomic Model/scenario
Direct transport CO2 emissions from shipping 
[Index, 2020 level = 1.0]Direct CO2 emissions from shipping (IMO) 
[Index, 2020 level = 1.0]
IAM C1–2: 1.5°C (>50%)
IAM C6–8: ≥2.5°C (>50%)
IAM C3–5: <2.5°C (>50%)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Figure 10.16 | CO 2 emissions from shipping scenarios indexed to 2020 modelled year.  Panel (a) scenarios from the AR6 database. Panel (b) scenarios from the 
Fourth IMO GHG Study (Faber et al., 2020). Figures show median, 5th and 95th percentile (shaded area) for each scenario group.
Transport  Chapter 1010
development, technological development, resource availability, 
policy, and behavioural change. The key differences underlying these 
models are their depth of technological and behavioural detail versus 
scope in terms of sectoral and regional coverage. In very general 
terms, the narrower the scope in terms of sectors and regions, the 
more depth on spatial, technological, and behavioural detail. A large 
set of scenarios from these models were collected in a joint effort led 
by Chapter 3 and supported by Chapter 10 and others. The outcomes 
from over 100 models have been analysed for this chapter with the 
methodologies set out in Annex III for the whole report.
GHG emissions from transport are a  function of travel demand, 
travel mode, transport technology, GHG intensity of fuels, and energy 
efficiency. These drivers can be organised around a group of levers 
that can advance the decarbonisation of the transport system. The 
levers thus include reducing travel activity, increasing use of lower-
carbon modes, and reducing modal energy intensity and fuel carbon 
content. This section explores each lever’s contributions to the 
decarbonisation of the transport sector by reviewing the results from 
the three model types IAM, GTEM, and NTEM.
IAMs integrate factors from other sectors that interact with the 
transport system endogenously, such as fuel availability and costs. 
IAMs minimise mitigation costs to achieve a  temperature goal 
across all sectors of the economy over a long time horizon (typically 
to 2100). IAMs typically capture mitigation options for energy 
and carbon intensity changes with greater technology/fuel details and 
endogeneity linked to the other sectors. In the scenarios with very 
large-scale electrification of the transport sector, the coupling with the 
other sectors in fuel production, storage, and utilisation becomes more 
important. G-/NTEMs and related regional transport sectoral models 
have more details on transport demand, technology, behaviours, and 
policies than IAMs, but treat the interactions with the other sectors 
exogenously, potentially missing some critical interactions, such as 
the fuel prices and carbon intensity of electricity. National models 
have detailed representation of national policies related to transport 
and energy, sometimes with greater spatial resolution. Compared 
with IAMs, G-/NTEMs typically have greater detailed representation 
to explore mitigation options along the activity and mode dimensions 
where spatial, cultural, and behavioural details can be more explicitly 
represented. Section 5 in Annex III provides more details about these 
types of models. Scenarios for shipping and aviation are handled in 
more detail in sections 10.5 and 10.6, respectively.
This section applies the following categorisation of scenarios (see 
Table 3.1 for more details):
• C1 (scenarios that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 
21st century with no or limited overshoot)
• C2 (scenarios that return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 
21st century after a high overshoot)
• C3 (scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) throughout the 
21st century)
• C4 (scenarios that limit warming to 2°C (>50%) throughout the 
21st century)
• C5 (scenarios that limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%) throughout the 
21st century)• C6 (scenarios that limit warming to 3°C (>50%) throughout the 
21st century)
• C7 (scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%) throughout the 
21st century)
• C8 (scenarios that exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%) during the 
21st century)
A large share of the scenarios was developed prior to 2020. Results 
from such scenarios are indexed to a  modelled (non-COVID) year 
2020, referred to as 2020Mod.
10.7.2 Global Emissions Trajectories
In 2018, transport emitted 8.5 GtCO 2-eq, reaching a near doubling 
from 1990 levels after two decades of 2% per year emissions growth 
(Section 10.1). Assessing future trajectories, Figure 10.17 provides an 
overview of direct CO 2 emissions estimates from the transport sector 
across IAMs (colour bars) and selected global transport models (grey 
bars). The results from the IAMs are grouped in bins by temperature 
goal. Global transport energy models are grouped into reference and 
policy bins, since the transport sector cannot by itself achieve fixed 
global temperature goals. The policy scenarios in GTEMs and NTEMs 
cover a wide range of ‘non-reference’ scenarios, which include, for 
example, assumptions based on the ‘fair share action’ principles. In 
these scenarios, transport emissions reach reductions consistent with 
the overall emissions trajectories aligning with warming levels of 2°C. 
These scenarios may also consider strengthening existing transport 
policies, such as increasing fuel economy standards or large-scale 
deployments of electric vehicles. In most cases, these Policy scenarios 
are not necessarily in line with the temperature goals explored by 
the IAMs.
According to the collection of simulations from the IAM and GTEM 
models shown in Figure 10.17, global transport emissions could grow 
up to 2–47% (5–95th percentile) by 2030 and –6–130% by 2050 
under the C7 scenarios that limit warming to 4°C (>50%) throughout 
the 21st century and C8 scenarios that exceed 4°C (≥50%) during the 
21st century. Population and GDP growth and the secondary effects, 
including higher travel service demand per  capita and increased 
freight activities per  GDP , drive the growth in emissions in these 
scenarios (Section 10.7.3). Though transport efficiencies (energy use 
per pkm travelled and per tkm of goods delivered) are expected to 
continue to improve in line with the historical trends (Section 10.7.4), 
total transport emissions would grow due to roughly constant carbon 
intensity (Section 10.7.5) under the C7 and C8 scenarios that limit 
warming to 4°C (>50%) throughout the 21st  century or exceed 
4°C (≥50%) during the 21st century. In these scenarios, Significant 
increases in emissions (>150% for the medium values by 2050) would 
come from Asia and Pacific, the Middle East, and Africa. Compared 
to estimated 2020 levels, in 2050 Developed Countries would have 
median 25% decrease in transport emissions in the C7 scenarios that 
limit warming to 4°C (>50%) throughout the 21st century or median 
15% increase in transport emissions in the C8 scenarios that exceed 
warming of 4°C (≥50%) during the 21st century.
Chapter 10 Transport102.5
0.0




2.5
0.00.51.01.52.0
2.5
0.0 01246810
0.51.01.52.0
2.5
0.00.51.01.52.02.5
0.00.51.01.52.02.5
0.00.51.01.52.0




















1111a) World
b) Developed Countries (DEV) c) Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia (EEA)
d) Latin America and Caribbean (LAM) e) Africa (AF)
f) Middle East (ME) g) Asia and Paciﬁc (APC)IAM C1: 1.5°C (>50%) low overshoot
IAM C3: limit warming to 2°C (>67%)
IAM C4: limit warming to 2°C (>50%)
IAM C2: 1.5°C (>50%) high overshoot
IAM C5: limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%)
IAM C7: limit warming to 4°C (>50%)
IAM C8: Exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%)
Global and National Transport
Energy Models (G-/NTEM) Policy
Global and National Transport
Energy Models (G-/NTEM) ReferenceIAM C6: limit warming to 3°C (>50%)
AM/sectoral scenarios Illustrative pathway
2.0-Sup
1.5-Sup
1.5-Ren
CurPol
20-Rer
2.0-GS
ModAct
1.5-SF
Figure 10.17 | Direct CO 2 emissions from transport in 2030, 2050, and 2100 indexed to 2020 modelled year across R6 Regions and World.  IAM results are 
grouped by temperature targets. Sectoral studies are grouped by reference and policy categories. Plots show 5–95th percentile, 25–75th percentile, and median. Numbers above 
the bars indicate the number of scenarios. Data from the AR6 scenario database.
Transport  Chapter 1010
To meet temperature goals, by 2050 global transport emissions 
would need to decrease by 17% (+67% to –23% for the 5–95th 
percentile) below 2020Mod levels in the scenarios that limit warming 
to 2°C (>67%), 2°C (>50%) and 2.5 °C (>50%) throughout the 
21st century (C3-C5 scenarios – orange bars), and 47% (14–80% for 
the 5–95th percentile) in the scenarios that limit warming to 1.5°C 
(>50%) during the 21st  century with no or limited overshoot or 
return to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st century after high overshoot 
during the 21st  century (C1–C2 scenarios  – green bars). However, 
transport-related emission reductions may not happen uniformly 
across regions. For example, transport emissions from the Developed 
Countries and Eastern Europe and West Central Asia would decrease 
from 2020 levels by 2050 across all C1–C2 scenarios, but could 
increase in Africa, Asia and Pacific, Latin America and Caribbean, and 
the Middle East, in some of these scenarios. In particular, the median 
transport emissions in India and Africa could increase by 2050 in C1–
C2 scenarios, while the 95th percentile emissions in Asia and Pacific, 
Latin America and Caribbean, and the Middle East, could be higher 
in 2050 than in 2020.
The Reference scenario emission pathways from GTEMs described in 
Figure 10.17 have similar ranges to C7–C8 scenario groups in 2050. 
The Policy scenarios are roughly in line with C6–C7 scenarios for 
the world region. The results suggest that the majority of the Policy 
scenarios examined by the GTEMS reviewed here are in the range of 
the C3–C6 scenarios examined by the IAMs (Gota et al. 2016; IEA 
2017b; Yeh et al. 2017; Fisch-Romito and Guivarch 2019). The NDCs 
in the transport sector include a mix of measures targeting efficiency 
improvements of vehicles and trucks; improving public transit 
services; decarbonising fuels with alternative fuels and technologies 
including biofuels, fossil- or bio-based natural gas, and electrification; 
intelligent transport systems; and vehicle restrictions (Gota et  al. 
2016). Because of the long lag-time for technology turnover, these 
measures are not expected to change 2030 emissions significantly. 
However, they could have greater impacts on 2050 emissions.
Several GTEMs not included in AR6 scenario database have examined 
ambitious CO 2 mitigation scenarios. For example, a meta-analysis of 
scenarios suggests that global transport emissions consistent with 
warming levels of 2°C, would peak in 2020 at around 7–8 GtCO 2 
and decrease to 2.5–9.2 Gt for 2°C, with an average of 5.4 Gt by 

Development Scenario suggests global transport emissions decrease 
to 3.3 Gt (or 55% reduction from 2020 level) by 2050 (IEA 2021f). 
The latest IEA Net Zero by 2050 report proposes transport emissions 
to be close to zero by 2050 (IEA 2021e). The latter is lower than 
the interquartile ranges of the C1 group of scenarios from the AR6 
database analysed here.
Low-carbon scenarios are also available from national models (Latin 
America, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, Indonesia, India, 
Italy, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, UK, US) with a good representation 
of the transport sector. The low-carbon scenarios are either defined 
with respect to a global climate stabilisation level of, for example, 
2°C/1.5°C Scenario (Dhar et al. 2018), or a CO 2 target that is more 
stringent than what has been considered in the NDCs, such as the 
net-zero emissions pathways (Bataille et al. 2020; IEA 2021e). These studies have generally used bottom-up models (see Annex III) for the 
analysis, but in some cases, they are run by national teams using 
global models (e.g., the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) 
for China and India). National studies show that transport CO 2 
emissions could decline significantly in low-carbon scenarios in all 
the developed countries reviewed (Bataille et  al. 2015; Kainuma 
et al. 2015; Hillebrandt et al. 2015; Mathy et al. 2015; Pye et al. 2015; 
Virdis et al. 2015; Williams et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2016a) in 2050 
from the emissions in 2010 and reductions could vary from 65% to 
95%. However, in developing countries reviewed (Di Sbroiavacca 
et al. 2014; Altieri et al. 2015; Buira and Tovilla 2015; Rovere et al. 
2015; Shukla et al. 2015; Siagian et al. 2015; Teng et al. 2015; Dhar 
et al. 2018), emissions could increase in 2050 in the range of 35% 
to 83% relative to 2010 levels. Transport CO 2 emissions per capita 
in the developing countries were much lower in 2010 (varying 
from 0.15 to 1.39 tCO 2 per capita) relative to developed countries 
(varying from 1.76 to 5.95 tCO 2 per capita). However, results from 
national modelling efforts suggest that, by 2050, the CO 2 emissions 
per capita in developed countries (varying from 0.19 to 1.04 tCO 2 
per  capita) could be much lower than in developing countries 
(varying from 0.21 to 1.7 tCO 2 per capita).
The transport scenario literature’s mean outcomes suggest that 
the transport sector may take a  less steep emissions reduction 
trajectory than the cross-sectoral average and still be consistent 
with the 2°C goal. For example, most of the scenarios that limit or 
return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st century (C1–C2) 
reach zero emissions by 2060, whereas transport sector emissions 
are estimated in the range of 20% of the 2020Mod level (4–65% 
for the 10th to 90th percentiles) by 2100. This finding is in line with 
perspectives in the literature suggesting that transport is one of the 
most difficult sectors to decarbonise (Davis et  al. 2018). There is, 
however, quite a spread in the results for 2050. Since temperature 
warming levels relate to global emissions from all sectors, modelling 
results from IAMs tend to suggest that in the short and medium term, 
there might be lower cost mitigation options outside the transport 
sector. On the other hand, compared with GTEMs/NTEMs, some IAMs 
may have limited mitigation options available, including technology, 
behavioural changes, and policy tools especially for aviation and 
shipping. The models therefore rely on other sectors and/or negative 
emissions elsewhere to achieve the overall desired warming levels. 
This potential shortcoming should be kept in mind when interpreting 
the sectoral results from IAMs.
10.7.3 Transport Activity Trajectories
Growth in passenger and freight travel demand is strongly dependent 
on population growth and GDP . In 2015, transport activities were 
estimated at around 35–50 trillion pkm, or 5,000–7,000 pkm 
per  person per  year, with significant variations among studies 
(IEA 2017b; ITF 2019). The number of passenger cars in use has 
grown 45% globally between 2005–2015, with the most significant 
growth occurring in the developing countries of Asia and the Middle 
East (119%), Africa (79%), and South and Central America (80%), 
while growth in Europe and North America is the slowest (21% and 
4% respectively) (IOMVM 2021). On the other hand, car ownership 
Chapter 10 Transport105






















G-/NTEM Reference
Model type & category





















IAM C3: limit warming to 2°C (>67%)
IAM C4: limit warming to 2°C (>50%)IAM C2: 1.5°C (>50%) high overshoot
IAM C5: limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%)
IAM C7: limit warming to 4°C (>50%)
IAM C8: Exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%)IAM C6: limit warming to 3°C (>50%)a) World
b) Developed Countries (DEV) c) Eastern Eur. & West-Central Asia (EEA)
d) Latin America and Caribbean (LAM) e) Africa (AF)
f) Middle East (ME) g) Asia and Paciﬁc (APC)Illustrative pathway
2.0-Sup
1.5-Sup
1.5-Ren
CurPol
20-Rer
2.0-GS
ModAct
1.5-SF
Figure 10.18 | Transport activity trajectories for passenger (bottom panel) and freight (top panel) in 2030, 2050, and 2100 indexed to 2020 modelled 
year across R6 Regions and World.  Plots show 5–95th percentile, 25–75th percentile, and median. Numbers above the bars indicate the number of scenarios. Data from 
the AR6 scenario database.
Transport  Chapter 1010
levels in terms of vehicles per  1000 people in 2015 were low in 
developing countries of Asia and the Middle East (141), Africa (42), 
South and Central America (176), while in Europe and North America 
they are relatively high (581 and 670 respectively) (IOMVM 2021). 
The growth rate in commercial vehicles (freight and passenger) was 
41% between 2005 and 2015, with a somewhat more even growth 
across developed and developing countries (IOMVM 2021).
Figure  10.18 shows activity trajectories for both freight and 
passenger transport based on the AR6 database for IAMs. According 
to demand projections from the IAMs, global passenger and freight 
transport demand could increase relative to a modelled year 2020 
across temperature goals. The median transport demand from IAMs 
for all the scenarios in line with warming levels below 2.5°C (C1–C5) 
suggests that global passenger transport demand could grow by 
1.14–1.3 times in 2030 and by 1.5–1.8 times in 2050 (1.27–2.33 for 
the 5–95th percentile across C1–C5 scenarios) relative to modelled 

exhibit lower growth in passenger demand in 2050 compared to 
developing countries across all the scenarios. In 2030, most of the 
global passenger demand growth happens in Africa (44% growth 
relative to 2020), and Asia and Pacific (57% growth in China and 59% 
growth in India relative to 2020) in the scenarios that limit warming 
below 2.5°C (>50%) throughout the 21st century (C5). These regions 
start from a low level of per capita demand. For example, in India, 
demand may grow by 84%. However, the per capita demand in 2010 
was under 7000  km per  person per  year (Dhar and Shukla 2015). 
Similarly, in China, demand may grow by 52%, starting from per capita 
demand of 8000 km per person per year in 2010 (Pan et al. 2018). 
The per capita passenger demand in these regions was lower than in 
developed countries in 2010, but it converges towards the per capita 
passenger transport demand of advanced economies in less stringent 
climate scenarios (C6–C7). Demand for passenger travel would grow 
at a  slower rate in the stricter temperature stabilisation scenarios 
(<2.5°C and 1.5°C scenarios, C1–C5) compared to the scenarios 
with higher warming levels (C7–C8). The median global passenger 
demand in the scenarios that limit or return warming to 1.5°C during 
the 21st century (C1–C2) is 27% lower in 2050 relative to C8.
Due to limited data availability, globally consistent freight data is 
difficult to obtain. In 2015, global freight demand was estimated to 
be 108 trillion tkm, most of which was transported by sea (ITF 2019). 
The growth rates of freight service demand vary dramatically among 
different regions: over the 1975–2015 period, road freight activity 
in India increased more than 9-fold, 30-fold in China, and 2.5-fold 
in the US (Mulholland et al. 2018). Global freight demand continues 
to grow but at a slower rate compared to passenger demand across 
all the scenarios in 2050 compared to modelled 2020 values. Global 
median freight demand could increase by 1.17–1.28 times in 2030 
and 1.18–1.7 times in 2050 in all the scenarios with warming below 
2.5°C (C1–C5). Like passenger transport, the models suggest that 
a  large share of growth occurs in Africa and Asian regions (59% 
growth in India and 50% growth in China in 2030 relative to 
a modelled year 2020) in the C5 scenarios that limit warming below 
2.5°C (>50%) throughout the 21st  century. Global median freight 
demand grows more slowly in the stringent temperature stabilisation 
scenarios, and is 40% and 22% lower in 2050 in the scenarios that limit or return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st  century 
(C1–C2) and below 2.5°C scenarios (C3–C4), respectively, compared 
to scenarios with warming levels of above 4°C (C8).
GTEMs show broad ranges for future travel demand, particularly for 
the freight sector. These results show more dependency on models 
than on baseline or policy scenarios. According to ITF Transport 
Outlook (ITF 2019), global passenger transport and freight demand 
could more than double by 2050 in a  business-as-usual scenario. 
Mulholland et  al. (2018) suggest the freight sector could grow 
2.4-fold over 2015–2050 in the reference scenario, with the majority 
of growth attributable to developing countries. The IEA suggests 
a more modest increase in passenger transport, from 51 trillion pkm 
in 2014 to 110 trillion pkm in 2060, in a reference scenario without 
climate policies and a climate scenario that would limit emissions 
below 2°C. The demand for land-based freight transport in 2060 
is, however, slightly lower in the climate scenario (116 trillion tkm) 
compared to the reference scenario (130 trillion tkm) (IEA 2017b). 
The ITF , however, suggests that ambitious decarbonisation policies 
could reduce global demand for passenger transport by 13–20% 
in 2050, compared to the business-as-usual scenario (ITF 2019; ITF 
2021). The reduction in vehicle travel through shared mobility could 
reduce emissions from urban passenger transport by 30% compared 
to the business-as-usual scenario. Others suggest that reductions 
larger than 25%, on average, for both passenger and freight in 2030 
and 2050 may be needed to achieve very low carbon emissions 
pathways (Fisch-Romito and Guivarch 2019). In the absence of large-
scale carbon dioxide removal, few global studies highlight the need 
for significant demand reduction in critical sectors (aviation, shipping 
and road freight) in well below 2°C scenarios (van Vuuren et al. 2018; 
Grant et al. 2021; Sharmina et al. 2021).
Many models find small differences in passenger transport demand 
across temperature goals because IAM models rely on historical 
relationships between population, GDP , and demand for services to 
estimate future demand. This assumption poses a limitation to the 
modelling efforts, as mitigation efforts would likely increase travel 
costs that could result in lower transport demand (Zhang et  al. 
2018). In most models, demand is typically an exogenous input. 
These models often assume mode shifts of activities from the most 
carbon-intensive modes (driving and flying for passenger travel and 
trucking for freight) to less carbon-intensive modes (public transit 
and passenger rail, and freight rail) to reduce emissions.
Traditionally there is a disconnection between IAM models and bottom-
up sectoral or city-based models due to the different scale (both spatial 
and temporal) and focus (climate mitigation vs urban pollution, safety 
(Creutzig 2016)). The proliferation of shared and on-demand mobility 
solutions is leading to rebound effects for travel demand (Chen and 
Kockelman 2016; Coulombel et al. 2019) and this is a new challenge 
for modelling. Some IAM studies have recently begun to explore 
demand-side solutions for reducing transport demand to achieve 
very low-carbon scenarios through a combination of culture and low-
carbon lifestyle (Creutzig et al. 2018; van Vuuren et al. 2018); urban 
development (Creutzig et  al. 2015a); increased vehicle occupancy 
(Grubler et al. 2018); improved logistics and streamlined supply chains 
for the freight sector (Mulholland et  al. 2018); and disruptive low-
Chapter 10 Transport10carbon innovation, described as technological and  business model 
innovations offering ‘novel value propositions to consumers and which 
can reduce GHG emissions if adopted at scale’ (Wilson et al. 2019). In 
the literature from national models, demand has been differentiated 
between conventional and sustainable development scenarios 
through narratives built around policies, projects, and programmes 
envisaged at the national level (Dhar and Shukla 2015; Shukla et al. 
2015) and price elasticities of travel demand (Dhar et  al. 2018). 
However, a  greater understanding of  the mechanisms underlying 
energy-relevant decisions and behaviours (Brosch et al. 2016), and the 
motivations for sustainable behaviour (Steg et al. 2015), are critically 
needed to realise these solutions.
Overall, passenger and freight activity are likely to continue to 
grow rapidly under the C7 (>3.0°C) scenarios, but most growth 
would occur in developing countries. Most models treat travel 
demand exogenously following the growth of population and 
GDP , but they have limited representation of responses to price 
changes, policy incentives, behavioural shifts, nor innovative mobility 
solutions that can be expected to occur in more stringent mitigation 
scenarios. Chapter  5 provides a  more detailed discussion of the 
opportunities for demand changes that may result from social and 
behavioural interventions.
10.7.4 Transport Modes Trajectories
Globally over the last century, shares of faster transport modes have 
generally increased with increasing passenger travel demand (Schäfer 
2017; Schafer and Victor 2000). For short- to medium-distance travel, 
private cars have displaced public transit, particularly in OECD 
countries, due to a variety of factors, including faster travel times in 
many circumstances (Liao et al. 2020); consumers increasingly valuing 
time and convenience with GDP growth; and broader transport 
policies, such as provision of road versus public transit infrastructure 
(Mattioli et al. 2020). For long-distance travel, travel via aviation for 
leisure and business has increased (Lee et al. 2021). These trends do 
not hold in all countries and cities, as many now have rail transit 
that is faster than driving (Newman et  al. 2015). For instance, 
public transport demand rose from 1990 through to 2016 in France, 
Denmark, and Finland (eurostat 2019). In general, smaller and denser 
countries and cities with higher or increasing urbanisation rates tend 
to have greater success in increasing public transport share. However, 
other factors, like privatisation of public transit (Bayliss and Mattioli 
2018) and urban form (ITF 2021), also play a role. Different transport 
modes can provide passenger and freight services, affecting the 
emissions trajectories for the sector.
Figure  10.19 shows activity trajectories for freight and passenger 
transport through 2100 relative to a  modelled year 2020 across 
different modes, based on the AR6 database for IAMs and global 
transport models. Globally, climate scenarios from IAMs, and policy 
and reference scenarios from global transport models, indicate 
increasing demand for freight and passenger transport via most modes 
through 2100 (Yeh et al. 2017; Mulholland et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 
2018; Khalili et al. 2019). Road passenger transport exhibits a similar 
increase (roughly tripling) through 2100 across scenarios. For road passenger transport, scenarios that limit or return warming 
to 1.5°C during the 21st  century (C1–C2) have a  smaller increase 
from modelled 2020 levels (median increase of 2.4 times modelled 

(median increase of 2.7–2.8 times modelled 2020 levels). There are 
similar patterns for passenger road transport via light-duty vehicle, 
for which median increases from modelled 2020 levels are smaller 
for C1–C2 (3 times larger) than for C3–C5 (3.1 times larger) or C6–C7 
(3.2 times larger). Passenger transport via aviation exhibits a  2.2 
times median increase relative to modelled 2020 levels under C1–C2 
and C3–C5 scenarios but exhibits a 6.2 times increase under C6–C8. 
The only passenger travel mode that exhibits a decline in its median 
value through 2100 according to IAMs is walking/bicycling, in C3–
C5 and C6–C8 scenarios. However, in C1–C2 scenarios, walking/
bicycling increases by 1.4 times relative to modelled 2020 levels. 
At the 5th percentile of IAM solutions (lower edge of bands in 
Figure 10.19), buses and walking/bicycling for passenger travel both 
exhibit significant declines.
For freight, Figure  10.19 shows that the largest growth occurs in 
transport via road (Mulholland et al. 2018). By 2100, global transport 
models suggest a  roughly four-fold increase in median-heavy-duty 
trucking levels relative to modelled 2020 levels, while IAMs suggest 
a  two- to four-fold increase in freight transport by road by 2100. 
Notably, the 95th percentile of IAM solutions see road transport 
by up to 4.7 times through 2100 relative to modelled 2020 levels, 
regardless of warming level. Other freight transport modes – aviation, 
international shipping, navigation, and railways – exhibit less growth 
than road transport. In scenarios that limit or return warming to 
1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st  century (C1–C2), navigation and 
rail transport remain largely unchanged and international shipping 
roughly doubles by 2100. Scenarios with higher warming (i.e., moving 
from C1–C2 to C6–C8) generally lead to more freight by rail and less 
freight by international shipping.
Relative to global trajectories, upper-income regions  – including 
North America, Europe, and the Pacific OECD  – generally see less 
growth in passenger road via light-duty vehicle and passenger 
aviation, given more saturated demand for both. Other regions like 
China exhibit similar modal trends as the global average, whereas 
regions such as the African continent and Indian subcontinent exhibit 
significantly larger shifts, proportionally, in modal transport than the 
globe. In particular, the African continent represents the starkest 
departure from global results. Freight and passenger transport modes 
exhibit significantly greater growth across Africa than globally in all 
available scenarios. Across Africa, median freight and passenger 
transport via road from IAMs increases by 5 to 16 times and 4 to 

to modelled 2020 levels. Even C1 has considerable growth in Africa 
via both modes (3 to 16 times increase for freight and 4 to 29 times 
increase for passenger travel at 5th and 95th percentiles of IAM 
solutions by 2100).
As noted in Section  10.2, commonly explored mitigation options 
related to mode change include a  shift to public transit, shared 
mobility, and demand reductions through various means, including 
improved urban form, teleconferences that replace passenger 
Transport  Chapter 1010

 2040 2080
 2040 2080
1.01.52.02.5
1.01.52.0
1.0
0.51.52.02.5
1.0
0.51.52.0
1.0
0.51.52.0
1.2
0.81.22.02.53.0















G-/NTEM Policy G-/NTEM ReferenceTransport activity by mode World [Index, 2020 level = 1.0]
Freight all Freight aviation Freight international shipping
Freight navigation Freight rail Freight road
Freight road: HDT Passenger all Passenger aviation
Passenger bicycling and walking Passenger rail Passenger road
Passenger road: 2/3W Passenger road: Bus Passenger road: LDVIAM C1–2: 1.5°C (>50%)
 IAM C6–8: ≥2.5°C (>50%)
 IAM C3–5: <2.5°C (>50%)
Figure 10.19 | Transport activity trajectories for passenger and freight across different modes.  Global passenger (billion pkm per year) and freight (billion tkm 
per year) demand projections relative to a modelled year 2020 index. Results for IAM are for selected stabilisation temperatures by 2100. Also included are global transport 
models Reference and Policy scenarios. Data from the AR6 scenario database. Trajectories span the 5th to 95th percentiles across models, with a solid line indicating the median 
value across models.
Chapter 10 Transport10travel (Creutzig et al. 2018; Grubler et al. 2018; Wilson et al. 2019), 
improved logistics efficiency, green logistics, and streamlined supply 
chains for the freight sector (Mulholland et  al. 2018). NDCs often 
prioritise options like bus improvements and enhanced mobility that 
yield pollution, congestion, and urban development co-benefits, 
especially in medium- and lower-income countries (Fulton et  al. 
2017). Conversely, high-income countries, most of which have 
saturated and entrenched private vehicle ownership, typically focus 
more on technology options, such as electrification and fuel efficiency 
standards (Gota et al. 2016). Available IAM and regional models are 
limited in their ability to represent modal shift strategies. As a result, 
mode shifts alone do not differentiate climate scenarios. While this 
lack of representation is a limitation of the models, it is unlikely that 
such interventions would completely negate the increases in demand 
the models suggest. Therefore, transport via light-duty vehicle and 
aviation, freight transport via road, and other modes will likely 
continue to increase through to the end of the century. Consequently, 
fuel and carbon efficiency and fuel energy and technology will 
probably play crucial roles in differentiating climate scenarios, as 
discussed in the following sub-sections.
10.7.5 Energy and Carbon Efficiency Trajectories
This section explores what vehicle energy efficiencies and fuel 
carbon intensity trajectories, from the data available in the AR6 
database from IAMs and GTEMs, could be compatible with different 
temperature goals. Figure 10.20 shows passenger and freight energy 
intensity, and fuel carbon intensity, indexed relative to 2020Mod 
values. The top panel shows passenger energy intensity across all 
modes. LDVs constitute a  major share of this segment. Yeh et  al. 
(2017) report 2.5–2.75 MJ vkm–1 in 2020 across models for the LDV 
segment, which is very close to the IEA estimate of 2.5 MJ vkm–1 for 
the global average fuel consumption for LDVs in 2017 (IEA 2020d). 
For reference, these numbers correspond to 1.6–1.7  MJ  pkm–1 for 
an occupancy rate of 1.5. The following results of the AR6 database 
are conditional on the corresponding reductions in fuel carbon 
intensity. Figure  10.20 shows that the scenarios suggest that 
passenger transport’s energy intensity drops to between 10–23% 
(interquartile ranges across C1–C4) in 2030 for scenarios in line with 
warming levels below 2°C. In 2050, the medians across the group 
of scenarios that limit or return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during 
the 21st century (C1–C2), and scenarios that limit warming to 2°C 
(>67% or >50%) throughout the 2st century (C3–C4) suggest energy 
intensity reductions of 51% and 45–46% respectively. These values 
correspond to annual average energy efficiency improvement rates 
of 2.3–2.4% and 2.0–2.1%, respectively, from 2020 to 2050. For 
reference, the IEA reports an annual energy efficiency improvement 
rate of 1.85% per  year in 2005–16 (IEA 2020d). In contrast, the 
results from GTEMs suggest lower energy efficiency improvement, 
with median values for policy scenarios of 39% reduction in 2050, 
corresponding to annual energy efficiency improvement rates close to 
1.6%. The IAM scenarios suggest median energy intensity reductions 
of passenger transport of 57–61% by the end of the century would 
align with warming levels of both 1.5°C and 2°C (C1–C4) given the 
corresponding decarbonisation of the fuels.The scenarios in line with warming levels of 1.5°C or 2°C goals 
(C1 to C4) show different trends for freight’s energy intensity. The 
amount of overshoot and differences in demand for freight services 
and, to some extent, fuel carbon intensities contribute to these 
differences. For the two scenarios aligning with the warming levels 
of 1.5°C, the trajectories in 2030 and 2050 are quite different. The 
median C2 scenario that returns warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during 
the 21st century after high overshoot takes a trajectory with lower 
energy intensity improvements in the first half of the century. In 
contrast, the C1 scenario that limits warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during 
the 21st century with no or limited overshoot take on a more steadily 
declining trajectory across the means. The IAMs provide a less clear 
picture of required energy intensity improvements for freight than 
for passenger transport associated with different temperature 
targets. As for the carbon intensity of direct energy used across 
both passenger and freight, the modelling scenarios suggest very 
moderate reductions by 2030. The interquartile ranges for the C1 
scenarios suggest global average reductions in carbon intensity of 
5–10%. Across the other scenarios compatible with warming levels 
of 1.5°C or 2°C (C2–C4), the interquartile ranges span from 1–6% 
reductions in carbon intensity of direct energy used for transport. For 
2050, the scenarios suggest that dependence on fuel decarbonisation 
increases with more stringent temperature targets. For the scenarios 
that limits warming to 1.5°C (>50%) during the 21st century with no 
or limited overshoot (C1), global carbon intensity of energy used for 
transport decreases by 37–60% (interquartile range) by 2050 with 
a mean of 50% reduction. The IAM scenarios in the AR6 database 
do not suggest full decarbonisation of transport fuels by 2100. The 
interquartile ranges across the C1–C4 set of scenarios, compatible 
with warming levels of 2°C and less, span from 61–91% reduction 
from 2020Mod levels.
Increasing the occupancy rate of passenger transport (Grubler et  al. 
2018) and reducing empty miles or increasing payload in freight 
deliveries (Gucwa and Schäfer 2013; McKinnon 2018) via improved 
logistics efficiency or streamlined supply chains (Mulholland et  al. 
2018), can present significant opportunities to effectively improve 
energy efficiency and decrease GHG emissions in transport. However, 
the recent trends of consumer behaviours have shown a  declining 
occupancy rate of light-duty vehicles in industrialised countries 
(Schäfer and Yeh 2020), and the accelerating growing preference for 
SUVs challenges emissions reductions in the passenger car market (IEA 
2019d). These trends motivate a strong focus on demand-side options.
Based on the scenario literature, a 51% reduction in median energy 
intensity of passenger transport and a  corresponding 38–50% 
reduction in median carbon intensity by 2050 would be aligned 
with transition trajectories yielding warming levels below 1.5°C by 
the end of the century. For comparison, the LCA literature suggests 
a switch from current ICEs to current BEVs would yield a reduction 
in energy intensity well beyond 45% and up to 70%, for a  mid-
sized vehicle (Section  10.4). Correspondingly, a  switch from diesel 
or gasoline to low-carbon electricity or low-carbon hydrogen would 
yield carbon intensity reduction beyond the median scenario value. 
Thus, the LCA literature suggests technologies exist today that would 
already match and exceed the median energy and carbon intensities 
values that might be needed by 2050 for low warming levels.
Transport  Chapter 1010
G-/NTEM Policy
G-/NTEM Reference
Energy/CO2 intensity of transport World [Index, 2020 level = 1.0]
IAM/sectoral scenarios
IAM C1: 1.5°C (>50%) low overshoot IAM C3: limit warming to 2°C (>67%)
IAM C4: limit warming to 2°C (>50%)IAM C2: 1.5°C (>50%) high overshoot
IAM C5: limit warming to 2.5°C (>50%)
IAM C7: limit warming to 4°C (>50%) IAM C8: Exceed warming of 4°C (≥50%)IAM C6: limit warming to 3°C (>50%)
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2




0.00.20.40.60.81.01.22030Passenger energy intensity Freight energy intensity Fuel carbon intensity2050 2100








Figure 10.20 | Energy efficiency and carbon intensity of transport in 2030, 2050, and 2100 indexed to 2020 modelled year across scenarios.  Plots show 
5th/95th percentile, 25th/75th percentile, and median. Numbers above the bars indicate the number of scenarios. Data from the AR6 scenario database.
Chapter 10 Transport1010.7.6 Fuel Energy and Technology Trajectories
Two mechanisms for reducing carbon emissions from the transport 
sector are fuel switching for current vehicle technologies and 
transitioning to low-carbon vehicle technologies. Figure  10.21 
combines data from IAMs and GTEMs on shares of transport final 
energy by fuel. These shares account for fuel uses across modes – road, aviation, rail, and shipping – and both passenger and freight transport. 
Since the technologies have different conversion efficiencies, these 
shares of final energy by fuel are necessarily different from the shares 
by service (passenger-km or tonne-km) by fuel and shares of vehicle 
stock by fuel. For example, a current battery electric LDV powertrain 
is roughly three times more energy-efficient than a comparable ICE 
powertrain (Section  10.3, Table  10.9 in Appendix 10.1); thus, fuel 
Oil Electricity
Hydrogen Biofuels
OtherFuel shares of transport ﬁnal energy by service World [share]
Energy carrier
Gases
1.0
0.2
0.00.40.60.8
1.0
0.2
C1–2 C3–5 C6–8 C1–2 C3–5 C6–8 C1–2 C3–5 C6–80.00.40.60.82030 2050 2100Freight Passenger2.0-GS 2.0-Sup
CurPol 1.5-SupIllustrative pathway
Figure 10.21 | Global shares of final fuel energy in the transport sector in 2030, 2050, and 2100 for freight and passenger vehicles.  Plots show 10th/90th 
percentile, 25th–75th percentile, and median. Data from the AR6 scenario database.
Transport  Chapter 1010
shares of 0.25 for electricity and 0.75 for oil could correspond to 
vehicle stock shares of 0.5 and 0.5, respectively. In general, while 
models may project that EVs constitute a greater share of road vehicle 
stock, and provide a greater share of road passenger-kilometres, their 
share of transport final energy (Figure 10.21) can still remain lower 
than the final energy share of fuels used in less-efficient (e.g., ICE) 
vehicles. Thus, the shares of transport final energy by fuel presented 
in Figure 10.21 should be interpreted with care.
IAM and GTEM scenarios indicate that fuel and technology shifts 
are crucial to reduce carbon emissions to achieve lower levels of 
warming (Edelenbosch et al. 2017; IEA 2017b). Across the transport 
sector, a  technology shift towards advanced fuel vehicles is the 
dominant driver of decarbonisation in model projections. This trend is 
consistent across climate scenarios, with larger decreases in the final 
energy share of oil in scenarios that achieve progressively lower levels 
of warming. Due to efficiency improvements, the higher efficiency 
of advanced fuel vehicles, and slower progress in the freight sector, 
the final energy share of oil decreases more rapidly after 2030. By 
2050, the final energy shares of electricity, biofuels, and alternative 
gaseous fuels increase, with shares from electricity generally about 
twice as high (median values from 10–30% across warming levels) 
as the shares from biofuels and gases (median values from 5–10%). 
While IAMs suggest that the final energy share of hydrogen will 
remain low in 2050, by 2100 the median projections include 5–10% 
hydrogen in transport final energy.
While few IAMs report final energy shares by transport mode or 
passenger/freight, several relevant studies provide insights into 
fuel share trends in passenger LDVs and freight vehicles. The IEA 
suggests that full LDV electrification would be the most promising 
low-carbon pathway to meet a  1.75°C goal (IEA 2017b). The MIT 
Economic Projection and Policy Analysis model focuses on the 
future deployment of gasoline versus EV technologies in the global 
LDV stock (Ghandi and Paltsev 2019). These authors estimate that 
the global stock of vehicles could increase from 1.1 billion vehicles 
in 2015 up to 1.8 billion by 2050, with a growth in EVs from about 

driven primarily by cost projections (mostly battery cost reductions). 
Similarly, the International Council on Clean Transport (ICCT) indicates 
that EV technology adoption in the light-duty sector can lead to considerable climate benefits. Their scenarios reach nearly 100% 
electrification of LDVs globally, leading to global GHG emissions from 
LDVs ranging from 0% to 50% of 2010 levels in 2050 (Lutsey 2015). 
Khalili et  al.(2019) estimate transport stocks through 2050 under 
aggressive climate mitigation scenarios that nearly eliminate road 
transport emissions. They find the demand for passenger transport 
could triple through 2050, but emissions targets could be met 
through widespread adoption of BEVs (80% of LDVs) and, to a lesser 
extent, fuel cell and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. Contrary to these 
estimates, the US Energy Information Administration finds small 
adoption of electrification for LDVs and instead identifies diffusion of 
natural gas-fuelled LDVs in OECD and, to a greater extent, non-OECD 
countries through 2040. This trend occurs in a reference and a ‘low 
liquids’ case, which lowers LDV ownership growth rates and increases 
preferences for alternative fuel vehicles. A comprehensive overview 
of regional technology adoption models across many methodological 
approaches can be found in Jochem et al. (2018).
In freight transport, studies indicate a  shift toward alternative 
fuels would need to be supplemented by efficiency improvements. 
The IEA suggests efficiency improvements would be essential for 
decarbonisation of trucks, aviation, and shipping in the short-to-
medium term. At the same time, the IEA suggests that fuel switching 
to advanced biofuels would be needed to decarbonise freight in 
the long term (IEA 2019d). Mulholland et  al. (2018) investigated 
the impacts of decarbonising road freight in two scenarios: countries 
complying with COP21 pledges and a  second more ambitious 
reduction scenario in line with limiting global temperature rise to 
1.75°C. Despite the deployment of logistics improvements, high-
efficiency technologies, and low-carbon fuels, activity growth leads 
to a 47% increase in energy demand for road freight while overall 
GHG emissions from freight increase by 55% (4.8 GtCO2-eq) in 2050 
(relative to 2015) in the COP21 scenario. In the 1.75°C scenario, 
decarbonisation happens primarily through a  switch to alternative 
fuels (hybrid electric and full battery electric trucks), which leads 
to a 60% reduction in GHG emissions from freight in 2050 relative 
to 2015. Khalili et al. (2019) also find substantial shifts to alternative 
fuels in HDVs under aggressive climate mitigation scenarios. Battery 
electric, hydrogen fuel cell, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles 
constitute 50%, 30%, and 15% of heavy-duty vehicles respectively 
in 2050. They also find 90% of buses would be electrified by 2050.
Box 10.4 | Three Illustrative Mitigation Pathways
Section 10.7 presents the full set of scenarios in the AR6 database and highlights the broader trends of how the transport sector may 
transform in order to be compliant with different warming levels. This box elaborates on three illustrative mitigation pathways (IMPs) 
to exemplify a few different ways the sector may transform. Seven illustrative pathways are introduced in Section 3.2.5. In this box we 
focus on three of the IMPs: (i) focus on deep renewable energy penetration and electrification (IMP-Ren), (ii) low demand (IMP-LD), 
and (iii) pathways that align with both Sustainable Development Goals and climate policies (IMP-SP). In particular, the variants of 
these three scenarios limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot (C1).
All of the three selected pathways reach global net zero CO 2 emissions across all sectors between 2060 and 2070, but not all reach 
net zero GHG emissions (Figure 3.4). Panel (a) in Box 10.4, Figure 1 below shows the CO 2 trajectories for the transport sector for the 
selected IMPs. Please note that the year 2020 is modelled in these scenarios, therefore, the scenarios do not reflect the effects of
Chapter 10 Transport10
10.7.7 Insights from the Modelling Literature
This section provides an updated, detailed assessment of future 
transport scenarios from IAM, GTEMs, and NTEMs given a wide range 
of assumptions and under a  set of policy targets and conditions. 
The scenario modelling tools are necessary to aggregate individual 
options and understand how they fit into mitigation pathways from 
a systems perspective. The scenarios suggest that 43% (30–63% for the interquartile ranges) reductions in CO 2 emissions from transport 
(below modelled 2020 levels) by 2050 would be compatible with 
warming levels of 1.5°C (C1–C2 group). While the global scenarios 
suggest emissions reductions in energy supply sectors at large precede 
those in the demand sectors (Section 3.4.1), a subset of the scenarios 
also demonstrate that more stringent emission reductions in the 
transport sector are feasible. For example, the illustrative mitigation 
pathways IMP-REN and IMP-LD suggest emissions reductions of 80% Box 10.4 (continued)
the COVID-19 pandemic. For the low demand scenarios IMP-LD and renewables pathway IMP-Ren, CO 2 emissions from the transport 
sector decreases to 10% and 20% of modelled 2020 levels by 2050 respectively. In contrast, the IMP-SP has a steady decline of 
transport sector CO 2 emissions over the century. By 2050, this scenario has a 50% reduction in emissions compared to modelled 2020 
levels. Panels (b), (c) and (d) show energy by different fuels for the three selected IMPs. The IMP-SP yields a drop in energy for transport 
of about 40% by the end of the century. CO 2 emissions reductions are obtained through a phase-out of fossil fuels with electricity and 
biofuels, complemented by a minor share of hydrogen, by the end of the century. In IMP-Ren, the fuel energy demand at the end of 
the century is on a par with the 2020 levels, but the fuel mix has shifted towards a larger share of electricity complimented by biofuels 
and a minor share of hydrogen. For the IMP-LD scenario, the overall fuel demand decreases by 45% compared to 2020 levels by the 
end of the century. Oil is largely phased out by mid century, with electricity and hydrogen becoming the major fuels in the second half 
of the century. Across the three IMPs, electricity plays a major role, in combination with biofuels, hydrogen, or both.
Box 10.4, Figure 1 | Three Illustrative mitigation pathways for the Transport sector. Panel (a) shows CO 2 emissions from the transport sector indexed to 
simulated non-COVID-2019 2020 levels. Panels (b), (c), and (d) show fuels mix to achieve 1.5°C warming through three illustrative mitigation pathways: IMP-SP , 1.5 
IMP-Ren and IMP-LD, respectively. All data from IPCC AR6 scenario database.1.0 140


0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0 0(a) CO 2 emissions from transport (b) 1.5 SP
(c) 1.5 RenCO 2 emissions indexed to 2020 Modelled EJ fuels per year(d) 1.5 LDEJ fuels per year EJ fuels per year1.5 REN
1.5 SP
1.5 LD

HydrogenBiofuels
Electricity









Transport  Chapter 1010
and 90% respectively are feasible by 2050 en route to warming levels 
of 1.5°C with low or no overshoot by the end of the century.
The scenarios from the different models project continued growth in 
demand for freight and passenger services, particularly in developing 
countries. The potential for demand reductions is evident, but 
the specifics of demand-reduction measures remain less explored by the 
scenario literature. This limitation notwithstanding, the IAM and GTEMs 
suggest that interventions that reduce the energy and fuel carbon 
intensity of transport are likely crucial to successful mitigation strategies.
The scenario literature suggests that serious attempts at carbon 
mitigation in the transport sector must examine the uptake of 
alternative fuels. The scenarios described in the IAMs and GTEMs 
literature decarbonise through a  combination of fuels. Across the 
scenarios, electrification plays a key role, complemented by biofuels 
and hydrogen. In general terms, electrification tends to play the key 
role in passenger transport while biofuels and hydrogen are more 
prominent in the freight segment. The three illustrative mitigation 
pathways described in Box  10.4 exemplify different ways these 
technologies may be combined and still be compatible with warming 
levels of 1.5°C with low or no overshoot. Shifts towards alternative 
fuels must occur alongside shifts towards clean technologies 
in other sectors, as all alternative fuels have upstream impacts. 
Without considering other sectors, fuel shifts would not yield their 
full mitigation potentials. These collective efforts are particularly 
important for the electrification of transport, as the transformative 
mitigation potential is strongly dependent on the decarbonisation of 
the power sector. In this regard, the scenario literature is well aligned 
with the LCA literature reviewed in Section 10.4.
The models reviewed in this section would all generally be considered 
to have a good representation of fuels, technologies, and costs, but 
they often better represent land transport modes than shipping and 
aviation. While these models have their strengths in some areas, they 
have some limitations in other areas, like behavioural aspects. These 
models are also limited in their ability to account for unexpected 
technological innovation, such as a  breakthrough in heavy vehicle 
fuels, artificial intelligence, autonomy and big data, even the extent 
of digital communications replacing travel (Section 10.2). As a result 
of these limitations, the models cannot yet provide an exhaustive set 
of options for decarbonising the transport sectors. These limitations 
notwithstanding, the models can find solutions encompassing the 
transport sector and its interactions with other sectors that are 
compatible with stringent emissions mitigation efforts. The solutions 
space of transportation technology trajectories is therefore wider than 
explored by the models, so there is still a need to better understand 
how all options in combination may support the transformative 
mitigation targets.
10.8 Enabling Conditions
10.8.1 Conclusions Across the Chapter
This final section draws some conclusions from the chapter and 
provides an overview-based feasibility assessment of the major transport mitigation options, as well as a  description of emerging 
issues. The section ends by outlining an integrated framework for 
enabling the transformative changes that are emerging and required 
to meet the potential transformative scenarios from Section 10.7.
Transport is becoming a major focus for mitigation as its GHG emissions 
are large and growing faster than those of other sectors, especially in 
aviation and shipping. The scenarios literature suggests that without 
mitigation actions, transport emissions could grow by up to 65% by 
2050. Alternatively, successful deployment of mitigation strategies 
could reduce sectoral emissions by 68%, which would be consistent 
with the goal of limiting temperature change to 1.5°C above pre-
industrial levels. This chapter has reviewed the literature on all aspects 
of transport and has featured three special points of focus: (i) a survey of 
lifecycle analysis from the academic and industry community that uses 
these tools; (ii) surveying the modelling community for top-down and 
bottom-up approaches to identify decarbonisation pathways for the 
transport sector, and (iii) for the first time in the IPCC, separate sections 
on shipping and aviation. The analysis of the literature suggests three 
crucial components for the decarbonisation of the transport sector: 
demand and efficiency strategies, electromobility, and alternative fuels 
for shipping and aviation.
The challenge of decarbonisation requires a  transition of the 
socio-technical system, which depends on the combination of 
technological innovation and societal change (Geels et  al. 2017). 
A socio-technical system includes technology, regulation, user 
practices and markets, cultural meaning, infrastructure, maintenance 
networks, and supply networks (Geels 2005) (Cross Chapter Box 12 
in Chapter 16). The multi-level perspective (MLP) is a framework that 
provides insights to assist policymakers when devising transformative 
transition policies (Rip and Kemp 1998; Geels 2002). Under the MLP 
framework, strategies are grouped into three different categories. 
The Micro level (niche) category includes strategies where innovation 
differs radically to that of the incumbent socio-technical system. 
The niche provides technological innovations a  protected space 
during development and usually requires considerable R&D and 
demonstrations. In the Meso level (regime) state, demonstrations 
begin to emerge as options that can be adopted by leading groups 
who begin to overcome lock-in barriers from previous technological 
dependence. Finally, in the Macro level (landscape) stage, 
mainstreaming happens, and the socio-technical system enables 
innovations to break through. Figure 10.22 maps the MLP stages for 
the major mitigation strategies identified in this chapter.
Demand and behaviour. While technology options receive 
substantial attention in this chapter, there are many social and 
equity issues that cannot be neglected in any transformative 
change to mitigate climate change. Transport systems are socio-
economic systems that include systemic factors that are developing 
into potentially transformative drivers of emissions from the sector. 
These systemic drivers include, for example, changes in urban 
form that minimise automobile dependence and reduce stranded 
assets; behaviour change programmes that emphasise shared 
values and economies; smart technologies that enable better and 
more equitable options for transit and active transport as well as 
integrated approaches to using autonomous vehicles; new ways of 
Chapter 10 Transport10
enabling electric charging systems to fit into electricity grids, creating 
synergistic benefits to grids, improving the value of electric transit, 
and reducing range anxiety for EV users; and new concepts for the 
future economy such as circular economy, dematerialisation, and 
shared economy that have the potential to affect the structure of 
the transport sector. The efficacy of demand reduction and efficiency 
opportunities depends on the degree of prioritisation and focus by 
government policy. Figure  10.22 suggests that innovative demand 
and efficiency strategies are at the regime scales. While these 
strategies are moving beyond R&D, they are not mainstreamed yet 
and have been shown to work much more effectively if combined 
with technology changes, as has been outlined in the transformative 
scenarios from Section 10.7 and in Chapter 5.
Electromobility in land-based transport. Since AR5, there has been 
a significant breakthrough in the opportunities to reduce transport 
GHG emissions in an economically efficient way due to electrification 
of land-based vehicle systems, which are now commercially available. 
EV technologies are particularly well established for light-duty 
passenger vehicles, including micromobility. Furthermore, there are positive developments to enable EV technologies for buses, light- and 
medium-duty trucks, and some rail applications (though advanced 
biofuels and hydrogen may also contribute to the decarbonisation 
of these vehicles in some contexts). In developing countries, where 
micromobility and public transit account for a large share of travel, 
EVs are ideal to support mitigation of emissions. Finally, demand 
for critical materials needed for batteries has become a  focus of 
attention, as described in Box 10.6.
Electromobility options are moving from regime to landscape levels. 
This transition is evident in the trend of incumbent automobile 
manufacturers producing an increasing range of EVs in response to 
demand, policy, and regulatory signals. EVs for light-duty passenger 
travel are largely commercial and likely to become competitive with 
ICE vehicles in the early 2020s (Dia 2019; Bond et al. 2020; Koasidis 
et al. 2020). As these adopted technologies increase throughout cities 
and regions, governments and energy suppliers will have to deploy 
new infrastructure to support them, including reliable low-carbon 
grids and charging stations (Sierzchula et  al. 2014). In addition, 
regulatory reviews will be necessary to ensure equitable transition Regime scale
ASI policy interventions
Niche scale
R&D demonstrationsLandscape scale
Remove barriers to mainstream
Time to deliverScale of adoptionLarge
Medium
Small

strategies for 
net zero 
transport, land 
use and energy
• Regulatory 
reviews on 
vehicles, land 
development 
and energy
• Procurement 
partnerships 
on government 
ﬂeets, buses, 
EVs, taxis, 
tuk-tuks, 
share bikes
• City and regional 
engagement 
and education 
programmes• ASI regulations for 
each mode
• ASI strategies for each 
mode (net zero)
• ASI strategies for each 
settlement fabric 
(central, inner, outer, 
rural, remote)
• ASI engagement and 
education programmes• Net zero targets, global
• R&D funds from ports 
and companies
• Demonstrations in major 
ports
• Local engagement and 
education programmes 
around the worldMedium
Market 
commerciality

electro-
mobility
Personal and 
freight modes 
Travel 
demand 
and vehicle 
efﬁciency
All modes 
Heavy 
vehicle fuels
Shipping and aviation
Figure 10.22 | Mitigation options and enabling conditions for transport.  Niche scale includes strategies that still require innovation.
Transport  Chapter 1010
and achievement of SDGs, addressing the multitude of possible 
barriers that may be present due to the incumbency of traditional 
automotive manufacturers and associated supporting elements of 
the socio-technical system (Newman 2020b) (Chapter 6). Similarly, 
new partnerships between government, industry, and communities 
will be needed to support the transition to electromobility. These 
partnerships could be particularly effective at supporting engagement 
and education programmes (Newman 2020b) (Chapter 8).
Deployment of electromobility is not limited to developed 
countries. The transportation sector in low- and middle-income 
countries includes millions of gas-powered motorcycles within cities 
across Africa, South-East Asia, and South America (Posada et  al. 
2011; Ehebrecht et al. 2018). Many of these motorcycles function as 
taxis. In Kampala, Uganda, estimates place the number of motorcycle 
taxis, known locally as boda bodas, at around 40,000 (Ehebrecht et al. 
2018). The popularity of the motorcycle for personal and taxi use is 
due to many factors including lower upfront costs, lack of regulation, 
and mobility in highly congested urban contexts (Posada et al. 2011; 
UNECE 2018). While motorcycles are often seen as a  more fuel-
efficient alternative, emissions can be worse from two-wheelers than 
cars, particularly nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), and 
hydrocarbon emissions (Vasic and Weilenmann 2006; Ehebrecht et al. 
2018). These two-wheeler emissions contribute to dangerous levels of 
air pollution across many cities in low- and middle-income countries. 
In Kampala, for example, air pollution levels frequently exceed levels 
deemed safe for humans by the World Health Organization (Kampala 
Capital City Authority 2018; World Health Organization 2018; Airqo 
2020). To mitigate local and environmental impacts, electric boda 
boda providers are emerging in many cities, including Zembo in 
Kampala and Ampersand in Kigali, Rwanda.
Bulawayo, the second-largest city in Zimbabwe, is also looking at 
opportunities for deploying electromobility solutions. The city is now 
growing again after a  difficult recent history, and there is a  new 
emphasis on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (City 
of Bulawayo 2020a; City of Bulawayo 2020b). With these goals in 
mind, Bulawayo is seeking opportunities for investment that can 
enable leapfrogging in private, fossil fuel vehicle ownership. In 
particular, trackless trams, paired with solar energy, have emerged 
as a potential pathway forward (Kazunga 2019). Trackless trams are 
a new battery-based mid-tier transit system that could enable urban 
development around stations and that use solar energy for powering 
both transit and the surrounding buildings (Newman et  al. 2019). 
The new trams are rail-like in their capacities and speed, providing 
a vastly better mobility system that is decarbonised and enables low 
transport costs (Ndlovu and Newman 2020). While this concept is 
only under consideration in Bulawayo, climate funding could enable 
the wider deployment of such projects in developing countries.
Fuels for aviation and shipping. Despite technology improvements 
for land-based transport, equivalent technologies for long distance 
aviation and shipping remain elusive. Alternative fuels for use in 
long-range aviation and shipping are restricted to the niche level. 
The aviation sector is increasingly looking towards synthetic fuels 
using low-carbon combined with CO 2 from direct air capture, while 
shipping is moving towards ammonia produced using low-carbon hydrogen. Biofuels are also of interest for these segments. To move 
out of the niche level, there is a need to set deployment targets to 
support breakthroughs in these fuels. Similarly, there is a need for 
regulatory changes to remove barriers in new procurement systems 
that accommodate uncertainty and risks inherent in the early adoption 
of new technologies and infrastructure (Borén 2019; Sclar et  al. 
2019; Marinaro et  al. 2020). R&D programmes and demonstration 
trials are the best focus for achieving fuels for such systems. Finally, 
there is a need for regulatory changes. Such regulatory changes need 
to be coordinated through ICAO and IMO as well as with national 
implementation tools related to the Paris Agreement (see Box 10.5). 
Long-term visions, including creative exercises for cities and regions, 
will be required, providing a  protected space for the purpose of 
trialling new technologies (Borén 2019; Geels 2019).
10.8.2 Feasibility Assessment
Figure 10.23 sets out the feasibility of the core mitigation options using 
the six criteria created for the cross-sectoral analysis. This feasibility 
assessment outlines how the conclusions outlined in Section 10.8.1 
fit into the broader criteria created for feasibility in the whole AR6 
report and that emphasise the SDGs. Figure  10.23 highlights that 
there is high confidence that demand reductions and mode shift can 
be feasible as the basis of a GHG emissions mitigation strategy for 
the transport sector. However, demand-side interventions work best 
when integrated with technology changes. The technologies that can 
support such changes have a range of potential limitations as well 
as opportunities. EVs have a reliance on renewable resources (wind, 
solar, and hydro) for power generation, which could pose constraints 
on geophysical resources, land use, and water use. Furthermore, 
expanding the deployment of EVs requires a rapid deployment of new 
power generation capacity and charging infrastructure. The overall 
feasibility of electric vehicles for land transport is likely high and their 
adoption is accelerating. HFCVs for land transport would also have 
constraints related to geophysical resource needs, land use, and water 
use. These constraints are likely higher than for EVs, since producing 
hydrogen with electricity reduces the overall efficiency of meeting 
travel demand. Furthermore, the infrastructure needed to produce, 
transport, and deliver hydrogen is under-developed and would require 
significant R&D and a  rapid scale-up. Thus, the feasibility of HFCV 
is likely lower than for EVs. Biofuels could be used in all segments 
of the transport sector, but there may be some concerns about their 
feasibility. Specifically, there are concerns about land use, water use, 
impacts on water quality and eutrophication, and biodiversity impacts. 
Advanced biofuels could mitigate some concerns and the feasibility of 
using these fuels likely varies by world region. The feasibility 
assessment for alternative fuels for shipping and aviation suggests 
that hydrogen-based fuels like ammonia and synthetic fuels have the 
lowest technology readiness of all mitigation options considered in 
this chapter. Reliance on electrolytic hydrogen for the production of 
these fuels poses concerns about land and water use. Using ammonia 
for shipping could pose risks for air quality and toxic discharges to the 
environment. The DAC/BECCS infrastructure that would be needed to 
produce synthetic fuel does not yet exist. Thus, the feasibility suggests 
that the technologies for producing and using these hydrogen-based 
fuels for transport are in their infancy.
Chapter 10 Transport10
Figure 10.23 | Summary of the extent to which different factors would enable or inhibit the deployment of mitigation options in transport.  Blue bars indicate the extent to which the indicator enables the implementation 
of the option (E) and orange bars indicate the extent to which an indicator is a barrier (B) to the deployment of the option, relative to the maximum possible barriers and enablers assessed. An ‘X’ signifies the indicator is not applicable or 
does not affect the feasibility of the option, while a forward slash indicates that there is no or limited evidence whether the indicator affects the feasibility of the option. The shading indicates the level of confidence, with darker shading 
signifying higher levels of confidence. Appendix 10.3 provides an overview of the extent to which the feasibility of options may differ across context (e.g., region), time (e.g., 2030 versus 2050), and scale (e.g., small versus large), and 
includes a line of sight on which the assessment is based. The assessment method is explained in Annex II.11.
Geophysical Environmental-Ecological Technological Economic Socio-Cultural InstitutionalPhysical potential
Geophysical resources
Land use
Air pollution
Toxic waste, ecotoxicity 
eutrophication
Water quantity and quality
Biodiversity
Simplicity 
Technological scalability
Maturity and technology 
readiness
Costs in 2030 and long term
Effects on employment and 
economic growth
Public acceptance 
Effects on health & wellbeing
Distributional effects
Political acceptance
Institutional capacity, governance 
and cross-sectoral coordination
Legal and administrative capacity
E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B E B
Demand reduction and mode shift
Biofuels for land transport, aviation, and shipping
Ammonia for shipping
Synthetic fuels for heavy-duty land transport, 
aviation and shipping
Electric vehicles for land transport
Hydrogen FCV for land transport
Low Confidence level barriers: B = BarriersE = Enablers
MediumLow Confidence level enablers: Medium High
HighStrength of enablers and barriers

Transport  Chapter 1010
Box 10.5 | Governance Options for Shipping and Aviation
Whenever borders are crossed, the aviation and shipping sector creates international emissions that are not assigned to states’ 
Nationally Declared Contributions under the Paris Agreement. Emissions from these segments are rapidly growing (apart from 
COVID-19 affecting aviation) and are projected to grow between 60% to 220% by 2050 (IPCC 2018; UNEP 2020). Currently, the 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Marine Organization (IMO), specialised UN Agencies, are 
responsible for accounting and suggesting options for managing these emissions.
Transformational goals?
ICAO has two global aspirational goals for the international aviation sector: 2% annual fuel efficiency improvement through 2050; 
and carbon neutral growth from 2020 onwards. To achieve these goals, ICAO has established CORSIA  – Carbon Offsetting and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation, a market-based programme.
In 2018, IMO adopted an Initial Strategy on the reduction of GHG emissions from ships. This strategy calls for a reduction of the carbon 
intensity of new ships through implementation of further phases of the energy efficiency design index (EEDI). The IMO calls for a 40% 
reduction of the carbon intensity of international shipping by 2030, and is striving for a 70% reduction by 2050. Such reductions in 
carbon intensity would result in an overall decline in emissions of 50% in 2050 (relative to 2008).
These goals are likely insufficiently transformative for the decarbonisation of aviation or shipping, though they are moving towards 
a start of decarbonisation at a period in history where the options are still not clear, as set out in Sections 10.5 and 10.6.
Regulations?
The ICAO is not a regulatory agency, but rather produces standards and recommended practices that are adopted in national and 
international legislation. IMO does publish ‘regulations’ but does not have powers of enforcement. Non-compliance can be regulated 
by nation states if they so desire, as a ship’s MARPOL certificate, issued by the flag state of the ship, means there is some responsibility 
for states with global shipping fleets.
Paris?
Some authors in the literature have argued that emissions from international aviation and shipping should be part of the Paris 
Agreement (Gençsü and Hino 2015; Lee 2018; Traut et al. 2018; Rayner 2021), arguing that the shipping and aviation industries 
would prefer emissions to be treated under an international regime rather than a national-oriented regime. If international aviation 
and shipping emissions were a part of the Paris Agreement, it may remove something of the present ambiguity about responsibilities. 
However, inclusion in the Paris Agreement is unlikely to fundamentally change emissions trends unless targets and enforcement 
mechanisms are developed, by ICAO and IMO or by nation states through global processes.10.8.3 Emerging Transport Issues
Planning for integration with the power sector: Decarbonising 
the transport sector will require significant growth in low-carbon 
electricity to power EVs, and more so for producing energy-
intensive fuels, such as hydrogen, ammonia and synthetic fuels. 
Higher electricity demand will necessitate greater expansion 
of the power sector and increase land use. The strategic use 
of energy-intensive fuels, focused on harder-to-decarbonise 
transport segments, can minimise the increase in electricity 
demand. Additionally, integrated planning of transport and power 
infrastructure could enable sectoral synergies and reduce the 
environmental, social, and economic impacts of decarbonising 
transport and energy. For example, smart charging of EVs could 
support more efficient grid operations. Hydrogen production, which is likely crucial for the decarbonisation of shipping and aviation, 
could also serve as storage for electricity produced during low-
demand periods. Integrated planning of transport and power 
infrastructure would be particularly useful in developing countries 
where ‘greenfield’ development doesn’t suffer from constraints 
imposed by legacy systems.
Shipping and aviation governance: Strategies to deliver 
fuels in sufficient quantity for aviation and shipping to achieve 
transformative targets are growing in intensity and often feature the 
need to review international and national governance. Some authors 
in the literature have argued that the governance of the international 
transport systems could be included in the Paris Agreement process 
(Gençsü and Hino 2015; Lee 2018; Traut et al. 2018). Box 10.6 sets 
out these issues.
Chapter 10 Transport10Box 10.5 (continued)
Individual nations?
If international regulations are not made, then the transformation of aviation and shipping will be left to individual nations. In 2020, 
Switzerland approved a new CO 2 tax on flights (The Swiss Parliament 2020), with part of its revenues earmarked for the development 
of synthetic aviation fuels, to cover up to 80% of their additional costs compared to fossil jet fuel (Energieradar 2020). Appropriate 
financing frameworks will be a key to the large-scale market adoption of these fuels. Egli et al. (2019) suggest that the successful 
design of investment policies for solar and wind power over the past 20 years could serve as a model for future synthetic aviation 
fuels production projects ‘attracting a broad spectrum of investors in order to create competition that drives down financing cost’, and 
with state investment banks building ‘investor confidence in new technologies.’ These national investment policies would provide the 
key enablers for successful deployments.
Managing critical minerals: Critical minerals are required to 
manufacture lithium-ion batteries (LIB) and other renewable power 
technologies. There has been growing awareness that critical minerals 
may face challenges related to resource availability, labour rights, and 
costs. Box 10.6 sets out the issues, showing how emerging national 
strategies on critical minerals, along with requirements from major 
vehicle manufacturers, are addressing the need for rapid development of new mines with a  more balanced geography, less use of cobalt 
through continuing LIB innovations, and a focus on recycling batteries. 
The standardisation of battery modules and packaging within 
and across vehicle platforms, as well as increased focus on design 
for recyclability, are important. Given the high degree of potential 
recyclability of LIBs, a near closed-loop system in the future would be 
a feasible opportunity to minimise critical mineral issues.
Box 10.6 | Critical Minerals and The Future of Electromobility and Renewables
The global transition towards renewable energy technologies and battery systems necessarily involves materials, markets, and supply 
chains on a hitherto unknown scale and scope. This has raised concerns regarding mineral requirements central to the feasibility of 
the energy transition. Constituent materials required for the development of these low-carbon technologies are regarded as ‘critical’ 
materials (US Geological Survey 2018; Commonwealth of Australia 2019; Lee et al. 2020; Marinaro et al. 2020; Sovacool et al. 2020). 
‘Critical materials’ are critical because of their economic or national security importance, or high risk of supply disruption. Many of 
these materials and rare earth elements (REEs) as ‘technologically critical’, not only due to their strategic or economic importance but 
the risk of short supply or price volatility (Marinaro et al. 2020). In addition to these indicators, production growth and market dynamics 
are also incorporated into screening tools to assess emerging trends in material commodities that are deemed as fundamental to the 
well-being of the nation (NSTC 2018).
The critical materials identified by most nations are: REEs neodymium and dysprosium for permanent magnets in wind turbines and 
electric motors; lithium and cobalt, primarily for batteries though many other metals are involved; and, cadmium, tellurium, selenium, 
gallium and indium for solar PV manufacture (Valero et al. 2018; Giurco et al. 2019). Predictions are that the transition to a clean 
energy world will be significantly energy intensive (World Bank Group 2017; Sovacool et al. 2020), putting pressure on the supply 
chain for many of the metals and materials required.
Governance of the sustainability of mining and processing of many of these materials, in areas generally known for their variable 
environmental stewardship, remains inadequate and often a source for conflict. Sovacool et al. (2020) propose four holistic recommendations 
for improvement to make these industries more efficient and resilient: diversification of mining enterprises for local ownership and 
livelihood benefit; improved traceability of material sources and transparency of mining enterprises; exploration of alternative resources; 
and the incorporation of minerals into climate and energy planning by connecting to the NDCs under the Paris Agreement.
Resource constraints?
Valero et al. (2018) highlight that the demand for many of the REEs and other critical minerals will, at the current rate of renewable energy 
infrastructure growth, increase by 3000 times or more by 2050. Some believe this growth may reach constraints in supply (Giurco et al. 
2019). Others suggest that the minerals involved are not likely to physically run out (Sovacool et al. 2020) if well managed, especially 
as markets are found in other parts of the world (for example the transition away from lithium from brine lakes to hard rock sources). 
Lithium hydroxide, more suitable for batteries, now competes well, in terms of cost, when extracted from rock sources (Azevedo et al. 
2018) due to the ability to more easily create high quality lithium hydroxide from rock sources, even though brines provide a cheaper
Transport  Chapter 1010
Enabling creative foresight: Human culture has always had 
a  creative instinct that enables the future to be better dealt with 
through imagination (Montgomery 2017). Science and engineering 
have often been preceded by artistic expressions; for example Jules 
Verne first dreamed of the hydrogen future in 1874 in his novel 
The Mysterious Island. Autonomous vehicles have regularly occupied 
the minds of science fiction authors and filmmakers (Braun 2019). 
Such narratives, scenario building, and foresighting are increasingly 
seen as a part of the climate change mitigation process (Lennon et al. 
2015; Muiderman et al. 2020) and can ‘liberate oppressed imaginaries’ 
(Luque-Ayala 2018). Barber (2021) emphasised the important role of 
positive images about the future instead of dystopian visions and the 
impossibility of business-as-usual futures.
Transport visions can be a part of this cultural change as well as the 
more frequently presented visions of renewable energy (Wentland 
2016; Breyer et  al. 2017). There are some emerging technologies, 
like Maglev, Hyperloop, and drones that are likely to continue the 
electrification of transport even further (Daim 2021) and which are 
only recently at the imagination stage. Decarbonised visions for 
heavy vehicle systems appear to be a core need from the assessment 
of technologies in this chapter. Such visioning or foresighting requires 
deliberative processes and the literature contains a growing list of 
transport success stories based on such processes (Weymouth and 
Hartz-Karp 2015). Ultimately, reducing GHG emissions from the 
transport sector would benefit from creative visions that integrate a  broad set of ideas about technologies, urban and infrastructure 
planning (including transport, electricity, and telecommunications 
infrastructure), and human behaviour and at the same time can 
create opportunities to achieve the SDGs.
Enabling transport climate emergency plans, local pledges 
and net zero strategies: National, regional and local governments 
are now producing transport plans with a climate emergency focus 
(Jaeger et  al. 2015; Pollard 2019). Such plans are often grounded 
in the goals of the Paris Agreement, based around local low-
carbon transport roadmaps that contain targets for and involve 
commitments or pledges from local stakeholders, such as workplaces, 
local community groups, and civil society organisations. Pledges often 
include phasing out fossil fuel-based cars, buses, and trucks (Plötz 
et  al. 2020), strategies to meet the targets through infrastructure, 
urban regeneration and incentives, and detailed programmes to 
help citizens adopt change. These institution-led mechanisms could 
include bike-to-work campaigns, free transport passes, parking 
charges, or eliminating car benefits. Community-based solutions like 
solar sharing, community charging, and mobility as a  service can 
generate new opportunities to facilitate low-carbon transport futures. 
Cities in India and China have established these transport roadmaps, 
which are also supported by the United Nations Centre for Regional 
Development’s Environmentally Sustainable Transport programme 
(Baeumler et al. 2012; Pathak and Shukla 2016; UNCRD 2020). There 
have been concerns raised that these pledges may be used to delay Box 10.6 (continued)
source of lithium (Kavanagh et al. 2018). Australia has proven resources of all the Li-ion battery minerals and has a strategy for their 
ethical and transparent production (Commonwealth of Australia 2019). Changes in the technology have also been used to reduce need 
for certain critical minerals (Månberger and Stenqvist 2018). Recycling of all the minerals is not yet well developed but is likely to be 
increasingly important (Habib and Wenzel 2014; World Bank Group 2017; Giurco et al. 2019; Golroudbary et al. 2019).
International collaboration
There have been many instances since the 1950s when the supply of essential minerals has been restricted by nations in times of 
conflict and world tensions, but international trade has continued under the framework of the World Trade Organization. Keeping 
access open to critical minerals needed for the low-carbon transition will be an essential role of the international community as the 
need for local manufacture of such renewable and electromobility technologies will be necessary for local economies. Nassar et al. 
(2020) report that over the past 30 years the US has become increasingly reliant in imports to meet domestic demand for minerals, 
including REEs. In terms of heavy REEs, essential for permanent magnets for wind turbines, China has a  near-monopoly on REE 
processing, though other mines and manufacturing facilities are now responding to these constrained markets (Stegen 2015; Gulley 
et al. 2018; Gulley et al. 2019; Yan et al. 2020). China, on the other hand, is reliant on other nations for the supply of other critical 
metals, particularly cobalt and lithium for batteries.
A number of critical materials strategies have now been developed by nations developing the manufacturing base of new power 
and transport technologies. Some of these strategies pay particular attention to the supply of lithium (Martin et al. 2017; Hache et al. 
2019). For example, Horizon 2020, a substantial EU Research and Innovation programme, couples research and innovation in science, 
industry, and society to foster a circular economy in Europe, thus reducing bottlenecks in the EU nations. Similarly CREEN (Canada 
Rare Earth Elements Network) is supporting the US–EU–Japan resource partnership with Australia (Klossek et al. 2016).
As renewables and electromobility-based development leapfrog into the developing world it will be important to ensure the critical 
minerals issues are managed for local security of supply as well as participation in the mining and processing of such minerals to 
enable countries to develop their own employment around renewables and electromobility (Sovacool et al. 2020).
Chapter 10 Transport10climate action in some cases (Lamb et  al. 2020) but such pledges 
can be calculated at a personal level and applied through every level 
of activity from individual, household, neighbourhood, business, 
city, nation or groups of nations (Meyer and Newman 2020) and 
are increasingly being demonstrated through shared communities 
and local activism (Bloomberg and Pope 2017; Sharp 2018; Figueres 
and  Rivett-Carnac 2020). Finally, the world’s major financing 
institutions are also engaging in decarbonisation efforts by requiring 
their recipients to commit to Net Zero Strategies before they can 
receive their funding (Robins 2018; Newman 2020a) (Chapter  15, 
Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1). As a result, transparent methods 
are emerging for calculating what these financing requirements 
mean for transport by companies, cities, regions, and infrastructure projects (Chapters 8 and 15). The continued engagement of financial 
institutions may, like in other sectors, become a  major factor in 
enabling transformative futures for transport as long as governance 
and communities continue to express the need for such change.
10.8.4 Tools and Strategies to Enable Decarbonisation 
of the Transport Sector
Using the right tools and strategies is crucial for the successful 
deployment of mitigation options. Table 10.7 summarises the tools and 
strategies required to enable electromobility, new fuels for aviation 
and shipping, and the more social aspects of demand efficiency.
Table 10.7 | Tools and strategies for enabling mitigation options to achieve transformative scenarios.
Tools and 
strategiesTravel demand reduction (TDR) 
and fuel/vehicle efficiencyLight vehicle electromobility systemsAlternative fuel systems 
for Shipping and Aviation
Education and R&DTDR can be assisted with digitalisation, connected 
autonomous vehicle, EVs and mobility as a Service 
(Marsden et al. 2018; Shaheen et al. 2018).
Knowledge gaps on TDR exist for longer distance 
travel (intercity); non-mandatory trips (leisure; 
social trips), and travel by older people. Travel 
demand foresighting tools can be open source 
(Marsden 2018).Behaviour change programmes help EVs 
become more mainstream. R&D will help on 
the socio-economic structures that impede 
adoption of EVs, the urban structures that enable 
reduced car dependence, and how EVs can assist 
grids (Newman 2010; Taiebat and Xu 2019; 
Seto et al. 2021).R&D is critical for new fuels and to test the full 
lifecycle costs of various heavy vehicle options 
(Marinaro et al. 2020).
Access and equityTDR programmes in cities can be inequitable. 
To avoid such inequities, there is a need for 
better links to spatial and economic development 
(Marsden et al.2018), mindful of diverse local 
priorities, personal freedom and personal 
data (Box 10.1).Significant equity issues with EVs in the transition 
period can be overcome with programmes that 
enable affordable electric mobility, especially 
public transit (IRENA 2016).Shipping is mostly freight and is less of 
a problem but aviation has big equity issues 
(Bows-Larkin 2015).
Financing economic 
incentives and 
partnershipsCarbon budget implications of different demand 
futures should be published and used to help 
incentivise net zero projects (Marsden 2018). 
Business and community pledges for net zero can 
be set up in partnership agreements (Section 10.8.3).Multiple opportunities for financing, economic 
incentives, and partnerships with clear economic 
benefits can be assured, especially using the role 
of value capture in enabling such benefits. The 
nexus between EVs and the electricity grid needs 
opportunities to demonstrate positive partnership 
projects (Zhang et al. 2014; Mahmud et al. 2018; 
Newman et al. 2018; Sovacool et al. 2018; Sharma 
and Newman 2020).Taking R&D into demonstration projects is 
the main stage for heavy vehicle options and 
these are best done as partnerships. Government 
assistance will greatly assist in such projects 
as well as an R&D levy. Abolishing fossil fuel 
subsidies and imposing carbon taxes is likely 
to help in the early stages of heavy vehicle 
transitions (Sclar et al. 2019).
Co-benefits and 
overcoming 
fragmentationProgrammes that focus on people-centred solutions 
for future mobility, with more pluralistic and feasible 
sets of outcomes for all people, can be successful. 
They need to focus on more than simple benefit-
cost ratios and include well-being and livelihoods, 
considering transport as a system rather than loosely 
connected modes, as well as behaviour change 
programmes (Barter and Raad 2000; Newman 2010; 
Martens 2020).The SDG benefits of zero-carbon light vehicle 
transport systems are being demonstrated and 
can now be quantified as nations mainstream this 
transition. Projects with transit and sustainable 
housing are more able to show such benefits. 
New benefit-cost ratio methods that focus on 
health benefits in productivity are now favouring 
transit and active transport (Buonocore et al. 
2019; UK DoT 2019; Hamilton et al. 2021).Heavy vehicle systems can also demonstrate 
SDG co-benefits if formulated with these in 
mind. Demonstrations of how innovations can 
also help SDGs will attract more funding. Such 
projects need cross-government consideration 
(Pradhan et al. 2017).
Regulation and 
assessmentImplementing a flexible regulatory framework 
is needed for most TDR (Li and Pye 2018). 
Regulatory assessment can help with potential 
additional (cyber) security risks due to digitalisation, 
autonomous vehicles, the internet of things, and 
big data (Shaheen and Cohen 2019). Assessment 
tools and methods need to take account of greater 
diversity of population, regions, blurring of modes, 
and distinct spatial characteristics (Newman and 
Kenworthy 2015).With zero-carbon light vehicle systems rapidly 
growing, the need for a regulated target and 
assessment of regulatory barriers can assist each 
city and region to transition more effectively. 
Regulating EVs for government fleets and 
recharge infrastructure can establish incentives 
(Bocken et al. 2016).Zero-carbon heavy vehicle systems need to 
have regulatory barrier assessments as they 
are being evaluated in R&D demonstrations 
(Sclar et al. 2019).
Transport  Chapter 1010Tools and 
strategiesTravel demand reduction (TDR) 
and fuel/vehicle efficiencyLight vehicle electromobility systemsAlternative fuel systems 
for Shipping and Aviation
Governance and 
institutional 
capacityTDR works better if adaptive decision-making 
approaches focus on more inclusive and whole-
of-system benefit-cost ratios (Marsden 2018; 
Yang et al. 2020).Governance and institutional capacity can 
now provide international exchanges and 
education programmes based on successful cities 
and nations, enabling light vehicle decarbonisation 
to create more efficient and effective 
policy mechanisms towards self-sustaining 
markets (Greene et al. 2014; Skjølsvold and 
Ryghaug 2019).Governance and institutional capacity can help 
make significant progress if targets are backed 
with levies for not complying. Carbon taxes 
would also affect these segments. A review 
of international transport governance is likely 
(Makan and Heyns 2018).
Enabling 
infrastructureEnsuring space for active transport and urban 
activities is taken from road space will be necessary 
in some places (Gössling et al. 2021b).
Increasing the proportion of infrastructure that 
supports walking in urban areas will structurally 
enable reductions in car use (Newman and 
Kenworthy 2015) (Section 10.2).
Creating transit activated corridors of transit-oriented 
development-based rail or mid-tier transit using 
value capture for financing will create inherently 
less car dependence (McIntosh et al. 2017; 
Newman et al. 2019).Large-scale electrification of LDVs requires 
expansion of low-carbon power systems, while 
charging or battery swapping infrastructure is 
needed for some segments (Gnann et al. 2018; 
Ahmad et al. 2020).In addition to increasing the capabilities 
to produce low- or zero-carbon fuels for 
shipping and aviation, there is a need to invest 
in supporting infrastructure including low-carbon 
power generation. New hydrogen delivery 
and refuelling infrastructure may be needed 
(Maggio et al. 2019). For zero-carbon synthetic 
fuels, infrastructure is needed to support carbon 
capture and CO 2 transport to fuel production 
facilities (Edwards and Celia 2018).