
Executive Summary
Finance to reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and 
enhance resilience to climate impacts represents a  critical 
enabling factor for the low carbon transition. Fundamental 
inequities in access to finance as well as its terms and 
conditions, and countries’ exposure to physical impacts of 
climate change overall result in a  worsening outlook for 
a  global just transition (high confidence). Decarbonising the 
economy requires global action to address fundamental economic 
inequities and overcome the climate investment trap that exists for 
many developing countries. For these countries the costs and risks 
of financing often represent a significant challenge for stakeholders 
at all levels. This challenge is exacerbated by these countries’ 
general economic vulnerability and indebtedness. The rising public 
fiscal costs of mitigation, and of adapting to climate shocks, are 
affecting many countries and worsening public indebtedness and 
country credit ratings at a time when there were already significant 
stresses on public finances. The COVID-19 pandemic has made these 
stresses worse and tightened public finances still further. Other major 
challenges for commercial climate finance include: the mismatch 
between capital and investment needs,1 home bias2 considerations, 
differences in risk perceptions for regions, as well as limited 
institutional capacity to ensure safeguards represent. {15.2, 15.6.3}
Investors, central banks, and financial regulators are driving 
increased awareness of climate risk. This increased awareness 
can support climate policy development and implementation 
(high confidence). Climate-related financial risks arise from physical 
impacts of climate change (already relevant in the short term), and 
from a  disorderly transition to a  low-carbon economy. Awareness 
of these risks is increasing leading also to concerns about financial 
stability. Financial regulators and institutions have responded with 
multiple regulatory and voluntary initiatives by to assess and address 
these risks. Yet despite these initiatives, climate-related financial risks 
remain greatly underestimated by financial institutions and markets 
limiting the capital reallocation needed for the low-carbon transition. 
Moreover, risks relating to national and international inequity  – 
which act as a barrier to the transformation – are not yet reflected in 
decisions by the financial community. Stronger steering by regulators 
and policy makers has the potential to close this gap. Despite the 
increasing attention of investors to climate change, there is limited 
evidence that this attention has directly impacted emission reductions. 
This leaves high uncertainty, both near-term (2021–30) and longer-
term (2021–50), on the feasibility of an alignment of financial flows 
with the Paris Agreement (high confidence). {15.2, 15.6}
Progress on the alignment of financial flows with low GHG 
emissions pathways remains slow. There is a climate financing 
gap which reflects a persistent misallocation of global capital 
(high confidence). Persistently high levels of both public and private 


exchange rate, political and governance risks, to information market failures.

to identify high-priority areas for cost-effective investments, but do not provide any indication on who would finance the regional investments.fossil-fuel related financing continue to be of major concern despite 
recent commitments. This reflects policy misalignment, the current 
perceived risk-return profile of fossil fuel-related investments, and 
political economy constraints (high confidence). {15.3}
Estimates of climate finance flows – which refers to local, national, 
or transnational financing from public, private, multilateral, bilateral 
and alternative sources, to support mitigation and adaptation actions 
addressing climate change – exhibit highly divergent patterns across 
regions and sectors and a slowing growth. {15.3}
When the perceived risks are too high the misallocation of abundant 
savings persists. Investors refrain from investing in infrastructure 
and industry in search of safer financial assets, even earning low or 
negative real returns. {15.2, 15.3}
Global climate finance is heavily focused on mitigation (more than 
90% on average between 2017–2020). This is despite the significant 
economic effects of climate change’s expected physical impacts, 
and the increasing awareness of these effects on financial stability. 
To meet the needs for rapid deployment of mitigation options, 
global mitigation investments are expected to need to increase by 
the factor of 3 to 6 (medium confidence). The gaps are wide for all 
sectors and represent a major challenge for developing countries,3 
especially Least-Developed Countries (LDCs), where flows have to 
increase by factor 4 to 7, for specific sectors like agriculture, forestry 
and other land use (AFOLU) in relative terms, and for specific groups 
with limited access to, and high costs of, climate finance (high 
confidence). {15.4, 15.5}
The actual size of sectoral and regional climate financing gaps 
is only one component driving the magnitude of the challenge, 
with financial and economic viability, access to capital markets, 
investment requirements for adaptation, reduction of losses 
and damages, climate-responsive social protection, appropriate 
regulatory frameworks and institutional capacity to attract and 
facilitate investments and ensure safeguards being decisive to scale-
up financing. Financing needs for the creation and strengthening 
of regulatory environment and institutional capacity, upstream 
financing needs as well as R&D and venture capital for development 
of new technologies and business models are often overlooked 
despite their critical role to facilitate the deployment of scaled-up 
climate finance (high confidence). {15.4.1, 15.5.2}
The relatively slow implementation of commitments by 
countries and stakeholders in the financial system to  scale 
up  climate finance reflects neither the urgent need for 
ambitious  climate action, nor the economic rationale 
for ambitious climate action (high confidence). Delayed climate 
investments and financing  – and limited alignment of investment 
activity with the Paris Agreement – will result in significant carbon 
particularly impact urban infrastructure and the energy and transport 
sectors (high confidence). A  common understanding of debt 
sustainability and debt transparency, including negative implications 
of deferred climate investments on future GDP , and how stranded 
assets and resources may be compensated, has not yet been 
developed (medium confidence). {15.6}
The greater the urgency of action to remain on a  1.5°C pathway 
the greater need for parallel investment decisions in upstream and 
downstream parts of the value chain. Greater urgency also reduces 
the lead times to build trust in regulatory frameworks. Consequently, 
many investment decisions will need to be made based on the long-
term global goals. This highlights the importance of trust in political 
leadership which, in turn, affects risk perception and ultimately 
financing costs (high confidence). {15.6.1, 15.6.2}
There is a  mismatch between capital availability in the developed 
world and the future emissions expected in developing countries. 
This emphasises the need to recognise the explicit and positive social 
value of global cross-border mitigation financing. A significant push 
for international climate finance access for vulnerable and poor 
countries is particularly important given these countries’ high costs 
of financing, debt stress and the impacts of ongoing climate change 
(high confidence). {15.2, 15.3.2.3, 15.5.2, 15.6.1, 15.6.7}
Ambitious global climate policy coordination and stepped-up 
(public) climate financing over the next decade (2021–2030) 
can help address macroeconomic uncertainty and alleviate 
developing countries’ debt burden post-COVID-19. It can 
also help redirect capital markets and overcome challenges 
relating to the need for parallel investments in mitigation and 
the up-front risks that deter economically sound low carbon 
projects. (high confidence). Providing strong climate policy signals 
helps guide investment decisions. Credible and clear signalling by 
governments and the international community reduce uncertainty 
for financial decision-makers and help reduce transition risk. In 
addition to indirect and direct subsidies, the public sector’s role in 
addressing market failures, barriers, provision of information, and risk 
sharing (equity, various forms of public guarantees) can encourage 
the efficient mobilisation of private sector finance (high confidence). 
{15.2, 15.6.1, 15.6.2}
The mutual benefits of coordinated support for climate mitigation 
and adaptation in the next decade for both developed and developing 
regions could potentially be very high in the post-COVID-19 era. 
Climate compatible stimulus packages could significantly reduce the 
macro-financial uncertainty generated by the pandemic and increase 
the sustainability of the world economic recovery. {15.2, 15.3.2.3, 
15.5.2, 15.6.1, 15.6.7}
Political leadership and intervention remain central to addressing 
uncertainty as a  fundamental barrier for a  redirection of financial 
flows. Existing policy misalignments  – for example in fossil fuel 
subsidies – undermine the credibility of public commitments, reduce 
perceived transition risks and limit financial sector action (high 
confidence). {15.2, 15.3.3, 15.6.1, 15.6.2, 15.6.3}Innovative financing approaches could help reduce the systemic 
underpricing of climate risk in markets and foster demand for 
Paris-aligned investment opportunities. Approaches include 
de-risking investments, robust ‘green’ labelling and disclosure 
schemes, in addition to a  regulatory focus on transparency 
and reforming international monetary system financial sector 
regulations (medium confidence). Markets for green bonds, ESG 
(environmental, social, and governance), and sustainable finance 
products have grown significantly since the Fifth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC AR5) and 
the landscape continues to evolve. Underpinning this evolution 
is investors’ preference for scalable and identifiable low-carbon 
investment opportunities. These relatively new labelled financial 
products will help by allowing a  smooth integration into existing 
asset allocation models (high confidence). Markets for green bonds, 
ESG (environmental, social, and governance), and sustainable 
finance products have also increased significantly since AR5, but 
challenges nevertheless remain, in particular there are concerns 
about ‘greenwashing’ and the limited application of these markets 
to developing countries. New business models (e.g., pay-as-you-go) 
can facilitate the aggregation of small-scale financing needs and 
provide scalable investment opportunities with more attractive risk-
return profiles. Support and guidance for enhancing transparency 
can promote capital markets’ climate financing by providing quality 
information to price climate risks and opportunities. Examples 
include Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) and environmental, 
social and governance (ESG) disclosure, scenario analysis and 
climate risk assessments, including the Task Force on Climate-Related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD). The outcome of these market-correcting 
approaches on capital flows cannot be taken for granted, however, 
without appropriate fiscal, monetary and financial policies. Mitigation 
policies will be required to enhance the risk-weighted return of low-
emission and climate-resilient options, and – supported by progress in 
transparent and scientifically based projects’ assessment methods – 
to accelerate the emergence and support for financial products 
based on real projects, such as green bonds, and phase out fossil fuel 
subsidies. Greater public-private cooperation can also encourage the 
private sector to increase and broaden investments, within a context 
of safeguards and standards, and this can be integrated into national 
climate change policies and plans. {15.1, 15.2.4, 15.3.1, 15.3.2, 
15.3.3, 15.5.2, 15.6.1, 15.6.2, 15.6.6, 15.6.7, 15.6.8}.
The following policy options can have important long-term 
catalytic benefits (high confidence). (i) Stepped-up both the 
quantum and composition of financial, technical support and 
partnership in low-income and vulnerable countries alongside low-
carbon energy access in low-income countries, such as in sub-Saharan 
Africa, which currently receives less than 5% of global climate 
financing flows; (ii) continued strong role of international and national 
financial institutions, including multilateral, especially location-based 
regional, and national development banks; (iii)  de-risking cross-
border investments in low-carbon infrastructure, development of 
local green bond markets, and the alignment of climate and non-
climate policies, including direct and indirect supports on fossil 
fuels, consistent with the climate goals; (iv) lowering financing costs 
including transaction costs and addressing risks through funds and 
risk-sharing mechanisms for under-served groups; (v) accelerated 
forest sector (REDD+), and climate-responsive social protection; 
(vi) improved financing instruments for loss and damage events, 
including risk-pooling-transfer-sharing for climate risk insurance; 
(vii)  economic instruments, such as phasing in carbon pricing and 
phasing out fossil fuel subsidies in a  way that addresses equity 
and access; and (viii) gender-responsive and women-empowered 
programmes. {15.2.3, 15.2.4, 15.3.1, 15.3.2.2, 15.3.3, 15.4.1, 15.4.2, 
15.4.3, 15.5.2, 15.6, 15.6.2, 15.6.4, 15.6.5, 15.6.6, 15.6.7, 15.6.8.2}
and Scope
Finance for climate action (or climate finance), environmental finance 
(which also covers other environmental priorities such as water, air 
pollution and biodiversity), and sustainable finance (which encompasses 
issues relating to socio-economic impacts, poverty alleviation and 
empowerment) are interrelated rather than mutually exclusive concepts 
(UNEP Inquiry 2016a; ICMA 2020a). Their combination is needed to 
align mitigation investments with multiple SDGs, and at a minimum, 
minimise the conflicts between climate targets and SDGs not being 
targeted. From a climate policy perspective, climate finance refers to 
finance ‘whose expected effect is to reduce net GHG emissions and/or 
enhance resilience to the impacts of climate variability and projected 
climate change’ (UNFCCC 2018a). However, as pinpointed in the AR5, significant room for interpretation and context-specific considerations 
remains. Further, such definition needs to be put in perspective with the 
expectations of investors and financiers (see Box 15.2).
Specifying the scope of climate finance requires defining two terms: 
what qualifies as ‘finance’ and as ‘climate’ respectively. In terms 
of what type of finance to consider, options include considering 
investments or total costs (Box 15.1), stocks or flows, gross or net 
(the latter taking into account reflows and/or depreciation), and 
domestic or cross-border, public or private (Box  15.2). In terms of 
what may be considered as ‘climate’, a  key difference relates to 
measuring climate-specific finance (only accounts for the portion 
of finance resulting in climate benefits) or climate-related finance 
(captures total project costs and aims to measure the mainstreaming 
of climate considerations). One should even consider the investments 
Box 15.1 | Core Terms
This box defines some core terms used in this chapter as well as in other chapters addressing finance issues: cost, investment, 
financing, public and private. The chapter makes broad use of the term finance to refer to all types of transactions involving monetary 
amounts. It avoids the use of the terms funds and funding to the extent possible, which should otherwise be understood as synonyms 
for money and money provided.
Cost, investment and financing: different but intertwined concepts. Cost encompasses capital expenditures (CAPEX or upfront 
investment value leveraged over the lifetime of a project) operating and maintenance expenditures (OPEX), as well as financing costs. 
Note that some projects e.g., related to technical assistance may only involve OPEX (e.g., staff costs) but no CAPEX, or may not incur 
direct financing costs (e.g., if fully financed via own funds and grants).
Investment, in an economic sense, is the purchase of (or CAPEX for) a physical asset (notably infrastructure or equipment) or intangible 
asset (e.g., patents, IT solutions) not consumed immediately but used over time. For financial investors, physical and intangible assets 
take the form of financial assets such as bonds or stocks which are expected to provide income or be sold at a higher price later. In 
practice, investment decisions are motivated by a calculation of risk-weighted expected returns that takes into account all expected 
costs, as well as the different types of risks, discussed in Section 15.6.1, that may impact the returns of the investment and even turn 
them into losses.
Incremental cost (or investment) accounts for the difference between the cost (or investment value) of a climate project compared to 
the cost (or investment value) of a counterfactual reference project (or investment). In cases where climate projects and investments 
are more cost effective than the counterfactual, the incremental cost will be negative.
Financing refers to the process of securing the money needed to cover an investment or project cost. Financing can rely on debt 
(e.g., through bond issuance or loan subscription), equity issuances (listed or unlisted shares), own funds (typically savings or auto-
financing through retained earnings), as well as on grants and subsidies
Public and private: statistical standard and grey zones. International statistics classify economic actors as pertaining to the 
public or private sectors. Households always qualify as private and governmental bodies and agencies as public. Criteria are needed 
for other types of actors such as enterprises and financial institutions. Most statistics rely on the majority ownership and control 
principle. This is the case for the Balance of Payment, which records transactions between residents of a country and the rest of the 
world (IMF 2009).
Such a strict boundary between public and private sectors may not always be suitable for mapping and assessing investment and 
financing activities. On the one hand, some publicly owned entities may have a mandate to operate on a fully- or semi-commercial 
basis, for example state-owned enterprises, commercial banks, and pension funds, as well as sovereign wealth funds. On the other 
hand, some privately owned or controlled entities can pursue not-for-profit objectives, e.g., philanthropies and charities. The present 
chapter considers these nuances to the extent made possible by available data and information.
contribute to these objectives (hydroelectricity, rail transportation).
In many cases, the scope of what may be considered as ‘climate 
finance’ will also depend on the context of implementation such as 
priorities and activities listed in countries’ Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC 2019a) 
as well as national development plans more broadly targeting the 
achievement of SDGs. Hence, rather than opposing the different 
options listed above, the choice of one or the other depends on the 
desired scope of measurement, which in turn depends on the policy 
objective being pursued. The increasingly diverse initiatives and body 
of grey literature address a range of different information needs. They 
provide analyses at the levels of domestic finance flows (e.g., UNDP 
2015; Hainaut and Cochran 2018), international flows (e.g. OECD 
2016; AfDB et al. 2018), global flows (UNFCCC 2018a; Buchner et al. 
2019), the financial system (e.g.,  UNEP Inquiry 2016a) or specific 
financial instruments such as bonds (e.g.,  CBI 2018). Common 
frameworks, reporting transparency are, however, necessary in order 
to identify overlaps, commonalities and differences between these 
different measurements in terms of scope and underlying definitions. 
In that regard, the developments of national and international 
taxonomies, definitions and standards can help, as further discussed 
in Section 15.6, and Chapter 17 in AR6 WGII report.
Beyond the need to scale up levels of climate finance, the Paris 
Agreement provides a  broad policy environment and momentum 
for a more systemic and transformational change in investment and 
financing strategies and patterns. Article 2.1c, which calls for ‘making 
finance flows consistent with a  pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development’, positions finance 
as one of the Agreement’s three overarching goals (UNFCCC 2015). 
This formulation is a recognition that the mitigation and resilience 
goals cannot be achieved without finance, both in the real economy 
and in the financial system, being made consistent with these goals 
(Zamarioli et al. 2021). It has in turn contributed to the development 
of the concept of alignment (with the Paris Agreement) used in 
the financial sector (banks, institutional investors), businesses, and 
public institutions (development banks, public budgets). As a result, 
since AR5, in addition to measuring and analysing climate finance, 
an increasing focus has been placed on assessing the consistency or 
alignment, as well as respectively the inconsistency or misalignment, 
of finance with climate policy objectives, as for instance illustrated 
by the multilateral development banks’ joint framework for aligning 
their activities with the goals of the Paris Agreements (MDBs 2018).
Assessing climate consistency or alignment implies looking at all 
investment and financing activities, whether they target, contribute 
to, undermine or have no particular impact on climate objectives. This 
all-encompassing scope notably includes remaining investments and 
financing for high-GHG emission activities that may be incompatible 
with remaining carbon budgets, but also activities that may play 
a  transition role in climate mitigation pathways and scenarios 
(Section 15.3.2.3). As a result, any meaningful assessment of progress 
requires the use of different shades to assess activities based on 
their negative, neutral (‘do no harm’) or positive contributions, 
(e.g.,  CICERO 2015; Cochran and Pauthier 2019; Natixis 2019). 
Doing so in practice requires the development of robust definitions, 
assessment methods and metrics, an area of work and research 
that remained under development at the time of writing. A  range 
Box 15.2 | International Climate Finance Architecture
International climate finance can flow through different bilateral, multilateral, and other channels, involving a range of different types 
of institutions both public (official) and private (commercial) with different mandates and focuses. In practice, the architecture of 
international public climate finance is rapidly evolving, with the creation by traditional donors of new public sources and channels 
over the years (Watson and Schalatek 2019), as well as emergence of new providers of development co-operation, both bilateral 
(Benn and Luijkx 2017) and multilateral (e.g., Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank), as well as of non-governmental actors such as 
philanthropies (OECD 2018a).
The operationalisation of the Green Climate Fund (GCF), which channels the majority of its funds via accredited entities, has notably 
attracted particular attention since AR5. Section 14.3.2 (in Chapter 14) provides a further assessment of progress and challenges of 
financial mechanisms under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), such as the GCF , the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) and the Adaptation Fund (AF).
The multiplication of sources and channels of international climate finance can help address growing climate-related needs, and 
partly results from increased decentralisation as well financial innovation, which in turn can increase the effectiveness of finance 
provided. There is, however, also evidence that increased complexity implies transaction costs (Brunner and Enting 2014), in part due 
to bureaucracy and intra-governmental factors (Peterson and Skovgaard 2019), which constitutes a barrier to low-carbon projects 
and are often not accounted for in assessments of international climate finance. On the ground, activities by international providers 
operating in the same countries may overlap, with sub-optimal coordination and hence duplication of efforts, both on the bilateral and 
multilateral sides (Ahluwalia et al. 2016; Gallagher et al. 2018; Humphrey and Michaelowa 2019), as well as risks of fragmentation of 
efforts (Watson and Schalatek 2020) which slows down coordination with international providers, national development banks and 
other domestic institutions.
as commercial services providers to the financial industry have 
developed frameworks, approaches and metrics, mainly focusing 
on investment portfolios (Institut Louis Bachelier et al.. 2020; IIGCC 
2021; TCFD Portfolio Alignment Team 2021; UN-Convened Net-Zero 
Asset Owner Alliance 2021), and, to a lesser extent for real economy 
investments (Micale et al. 2020; Jachnik and Dobrinevski 2021).
Key findings from AR5 and other IPCC publications. For the 
first time the IPCC in AR5 (Clarke et al. 2014) elaborated on the role 
of finance in a  dedicated chapter. In the following year, the Paris 
Agreement (UNFCCC 2015) recognised the transformative role of 
finance, as a  means to achieving climate outcomes, and the need 
to align financial flows with the long-term global goals even as 
implementation issues were left unresolved (Bodle and Noens 2018). 
AR5 noted the absence of a  clear definition and measurement of 
climate finance flows, a  difficulty that continues (Weikmans and 
Roberts 2019) (Sections 15.2 and 15.3). The approach taken in AR5 
was to report ranges of available information on climate finance flows 
from diverse sources, using a broad definition of climate finance, as in 
the Biennial Assessments in 2014 and again in 2018 (UNFCCC 2014a, 
2018a) of the Standing Committee under the UNFCCC: Climate 
finance is taken to refer to local, national or transnational financing – 
drawn from public, private and alternative sources of financing – that 
seeks to support mitigation and adaptation actions that address 
climate change (UNFCCC 2014b). For this chapter, while the focus is 
primarily on mitigation, adaptation, resilience and loss and damage 

deflating the values to constant USD 2015. In such cases, the unit is explicitly expressed as USD 2015.financing needs cannot be entirely separated because of structural 
relationships, synergies, trade-offs and policy coherence requirements 
between these sub-categories of climate finance (Box 15.1).
The AR5 concluded that published assessments of financial flows 
whose expected effect was to reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and/or to enhance resilience to climate change aggregated 
USD343–385 billion4 yr–1 globally between 2010 and 2012 (medium 
confidence). Most (95% of total) went towards mitigation, which 
was nevertheless underfinanced and adaptation even more so. 
Measurement of progress towards the commitment by developed 
countries to provide USD100 billion yr–1 by 2020 to developing 
countries, for both mitigation and adaptation (Bhattacharya et  al. 
2020)  – a narrower goal than overall levels of climate finance  – 
continued to be a  challenge, given the lack of clear definition 
of such finance, although there remain divergent perspectives 
(Section  15.2.4). As against these flows, annual need for global 
aggregate mitigation finance between 2020 and 2030 was cited 
briefly in the AR5 to be about USD635 billion (mean annual), both 
public and private, implying that the reported ‘gap’ in mitigation 
financing of estimated flows during 2010 to 2012 was slightly under 
one-half of that required (IPCC 2014).
More recent published data from the Biennial Assessments 
(UNFCCC 2018a) and the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C 
(IPCC 2018) have revised upwards the needs of financing between 

Box 15.3 | Mitigation, Adaptation and Other Related Climate Finance Merit Joint Examination
Mitigation finance deals with investments that aim to reduce global carbon emissions, while adaptation finance deals with the 
consequences of climate change (Lindenberg and Pauw 2013). Mitigation affects the scale of adaptation needs and adaptation 
may have strong synergies and co-benefits as well as trade-offs with mitigation (Grafakos et al. 2019). If mitigation investments 
are inadequate to reducing global warming (as in the last decade) with asymmetric adverse impacts in lower latitudes and low-
lying geographies, the scale of adaptation investments has to rise and the benefits of stronger adaptation responses may be high 
(Markandya and González-Eguino 2019). If adaptation investments build greater resilience, they might even moderate mitigation 
financing costs. Similar policy coherence considerations apply to disaster risk reduction financing, the scale of which depends on 
success with both adaptation and mitigation (Mysiak et al. 2018). The same financial actors, especially governments and the private 
sector, decide at any given time on their relative allocations of available financing for mitigation, adaptation and disaster-risk reduction 
from a constrained common pool of resources. The trade-offs and substitutability between closely-linked alternative uses of funds, 
therefore, make it essential for a simultaneous assessment of needs – as in parts of this chapter. Climate finance versus the financing 
of other Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) faces a similar issue. A key agreement was that climate financing should be ‘new 
and additional’ and not at the cost of SDGs. Resources prioritising climate at the cost of non-climate development finance increase 
the vulnerability of a population for any given level of climate shocks, and additionality of climate financing is thus essential (Brown 
et al. 2010). Policy coherence is also the reason why mitigation finance cannot be separated from consideration of spending and 
subsidies on fossil fuels. Climate change may additionally cause the breaching of physical and social adaptation limits, resulting in 
climate-related residual risks (i.e., potential impacts after all feasible mitigation, adaptation, and disaster risk reduction measures have 
been implemented) (Mechler et al. 2020). Because these residual losses and damages from climate-related risks are related to overall 
mitigation and adaptation efforts, the magnitude of potential impacts is related to the overall quantum of mitigation, adaptation, and 
disaster risk reduction finance available (Frame et al. 2020). All categories of climate finance thus need to be considered together in 
discussions around climate finance.
in the Biennial Assessment 2018 for the former, and for the latter, 
USD2.4 trillion yr–1 (mean) for the energy sector alone (and three 
times higher if transport and other sectors were to be included). 
The resulting estimated gaps in annual mitigation financing during 

sources, was about 67% for 2015, and 76% for the energy sector 
alone in 2017 (medium confidence), and greater if other sectors were 
to be included. While the annual reported flows of climate financing 
showed some moderate progress (Section  15.3), from earlier 
USD364  billion (mean 2010/2011) to about USD600 billion (mean 
2017/2020), with a slowing in the most recent period 2014 to 2017, 
the gap in financing was reported to have widened considerably 
(Sections 15.4 and 15.5). In the context of policy coherence, it is also 
important to note that reported annual investments going into the 
fossil fuel sectors, oil and gas upstream and coal mining, during 
the same period were about the same size as global climate finance, 
although the absence of alternative financing and access to low-
carbon energy is a complicating factor.
Adaptation financing needs, meanwhile, were rising rapidly. 
The Adaption Gap Report 2020 (UNEP 2021) reported that the 
current efforts are insufficient to narrow the adaptation finance 
gap, and additional adaptation finance is necessary, particularly 
in developing countries. The gap is expected to be aggravated by 
COVID-19 (high confidence). It reaffirmed earlier assessments that 
by 2030 (2050) the estimated costs of adaptation ranges between 
USD140 and 300 billion yr–1 (USD280 and 500 billion yr–1). Against 
this, the reported actual global public finance flows for adaptation 
in 2019/2020 were estimated at 46 billion (Naran et al. 2021). The 
costs of climate disasters meanwhile continued to rise, affecting low-
income developing countries the most. Climate natural disasters – 
not all necessarily attributable to climate change  – caused some 
USD300 billion yr–1 economic losses and well-being losses of about 
USD520 billion yr–1 (Hallegatte et al. 2017).
15.2 Background Considerations
The institutions under climate finance in this chapter refer to the 
set of financial actors, instruments and markets that are recognised 
to play a key role in financing decisions on climate mitigation and 
adaptation. For a definition of climate financial stock and flows see 
further Section 15.3 and the Glossary. The issue of climate finance is 
closely related to the conversation on international cooperation and 
the question of how cross-border investments can support climate 
mitigation and adaptation in developing countries. However, the issue 
is also related to more general questions of how financial institutions, 
both public and private, can assess climate risks and opportunities 
from all investments, and what roles states, policymakers, regulators 
and markets can play in making them more sustainable. In particular, 
the question of the respective roles of the public and private 
financial actors has become important in deliberations on climate 
finance in recent years. The broader macroeconomic context is an 
important starting point. Four major events and macro trends mark 
the developments in climate finance in the previous five years and 
likely developments in the near term.• First, the 2015 Paris Agreement, with the engagement of the 
financial sector institutions in the climate agenda, has been 
followed by a  series of related developments in financial 
regulation in relation to climate change and in particular to the 
disclosure of climate-related financial risk (high confidence) 
(Section 15.2.1).
• Second, the last five years have been characterised by a series 
of interconnected ‘headwinds’ (Section 15.2.2), including rising 
private and public debt and policy uncertainty which work 
against the objective of filling the climate investment gap 
(high confidence).
• Third, the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic crisis has put enormous 
additional strain on the global economy, debt and the availability 
of finance, which will be longer lasting (Section 15.2.3). At the 
same time, while it is still too early to draw positive conclusions, 
this crisis highlights opportunities in terms of political and policy 
feasibility and behavioural change in respect of realigning 
climate finance (medium confidence).
• Fourth, the sharp rise in global inequality and the effects of the 
pandemic have brought into renewed sharp focus the need for 
a Just Transition (Section 15.2.4) and a realignment of climate 
finance and policies that would be beneficial for a  new social 
compact towards a  more sustainable world that addresses 
energy equity and environmental justice (high confidence).
15.2.1 Paris Agreement and the Engagement of 
the Financial Sector in the Climate Agenda
This is the first IPCC Assessment Report chapter on investment 
and finance since the 2015 Paris Agreement, which represented 
a landmark event for climate finance because for the first time the 
key role of aligning financial flows to climate goals was spelled out. 
Since then, the financial sector has recognised the opportunity and 
has stepped up to centre-stage in the global policy conversation on 
climate change. While before the Paris Agreement, only few financial 
professionals and regulators were acquainted with climate change, 
today climate change is acknowledged as a strategic priority in most 
financial institutions. This is a major change in the policy landscape 
from AR5. However, this does not mean that finance necessarily plays 
an adequate enabling role for climate investments. On the contrary, 
the literature shows that without appropriate conditions, finance can 
represent a barrier to filling the climate investment gap (Hafner et al. 
2020). Indeed, despite the enormous acceleration in policy initiatives 
(e.g., NGFS 2020) and coalitions of the willing in the private sectors, 
the effect in terms of closing the investment gap identified already in 
AR5 has been limited (Section 15.5.2).
Financial investors have started to account for climate risk in some 
contexts but they do so only to a limited extent (Monasterolo and 
de Angelis 2020; Alessi et  al. 2021; Bolton and Kacperczyk 2021) 
and the reasons for these remain unclear. Two aspects are relevant 
here. The first is the endogenous nature of climate financial risk 
and opportunities (with the term ‘risk’ meaning here the potential 
for adverse financial impact, whether or not the distribution of 
losses is known). Academics and practitioners in finance are aware 
that financial risk can in certain contexts be endogenous, that is, 
players themselves. However, the standard treatment of risk both in 
financial valuation models and in asset pricing assumes that risk is 
exogenous. In contrast, endogeneity is a  key feature of climate risk 
because today’s perception of climate risk affects climate investment, 
which in turn affects directly the future risk. This endogeneity leads 
to the fact that multiple and rather different mitigation scenarios are 
possible (Chapter 3). Moreover, the likelihood of occurrence of each 
alternative scenario is very hard to estimate. Further, the assessment of 
climate-related financial risk requires to combine information related 
to mitigation scenarios as well as climate impact scenarios, leaving 
open an important knowledge gap for the next years (Section 15.6.1).
The second aspect is that the multiplicity of equilibria results in 
a  coordination problem whereby the majority of investors wait to 
move and reallocate their investments until they can follow a clear 
signal. Despite the initial momentum of the Paris Agreement, for 
many investors, both public and private, the policy signal seems not 
strong enough to induce them to align their investment portfolios to 
climate goals.
Analyses of the dynamics of the low-carbon transition suggest that 
it does not occur by itself and that it requires a policy signal credible 
enough in the perception of market players and investors (Battiston 
et al. 2021b). Credibility could require a policy commitment device 
(Brunner et al. 2012). The commitment would also need to be large 
enough (analogous to the ‘whatever it takes’ statement by the 
European Central Bank during the 2011–2012 European sovereign 
crisis (Kalinowski and Chenet 2020)). In principle, public investments 
in low-carbon infrastructures (or private-public partnerships) as well 
as regulation could provide credible signals if their magnitude and 
time horizon are appropriate (past experiences with feed-in-tariffs 
(FiTs) models across countries provide useful lessons).
15.2.2 Macroeconomic Context
Entering 2020, the world already faced large macroeconomic 
headwinds to meeting the climate finance gap in the near term – 
barring some globally coordinated action. While an understanding of 
the disaggregated country-by-country, sector-by-sector, project-by-
project, and instrument-by-instrument approach to raising climate 
finances analysed in the later parts of this chapter remains important, 
macroeconomic drivers of finance remain crucial in the near term.
Near-term finance financial flows in aggregate often show strong 
empirically observed cycles over time, especially in terms of 
macroeconomic and financial cycles. By near-term, we mean here the 
likely cycle over the next five to ten years (2020–2025 and 2020–2030), 
as influenced by global macroeconomic real business cycles (output, 
investment and consumption), with periodic asymmetric downside 
impacts and crises (Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010; Borio 2014; Jordà 
et al. 2017; Borio et al. 2018). Financial cycles typically have strong 
co-movements (asset prices, credit growth, interest rates, leverage, 
risk factors, market fear, macro-prudential and central bank policies) 
(Coeurdacier and Rey 2013), they have large consequences for all types of financial flows such as equity, bond and banking credit 
markets, which in turn are likely to impact climate finance flows to 
all sub-sectors and geographies (with greater expected volatility in 
more risky and more leveraged regions). This is in contrast to longer-
term trend considerations (2020–2050) that typically focus the 
attention on drivers of disaggregated flows of climate finance and 
policies. The upward trends of the cycles tend to favour speculative 
bubbles like real estates at the expense of investment in production 
and infrastructures whereas the asymmetric downsides raise 
uncertainty and risks for longer-term investments on newer climate 
technologies, and favour a flight to near-term safety (e.g., lowest risk 
non-climate short-term treasury investments, highest creditworthy 
countries, and away from cross-border investments (Section 15.5) – 
making the challenge of longer-term low-carbon transition more 
difficult. In this respect, the impact of financial regulation is unclear. 
On the one hand, it could be argued that the tighter bank regulations 
under Basel III, combined with an economic environment with higher 
uncertainty and flatter yield curve, can push banks to retrench 
from climate finance projects (Blended Finance Taskforce, 2018a), 
since banks tend to limit loan maturity to five or eight years, while 
infrastructure projects typically require the amortisation of debt over 

report that stricter capital requirements are not a driving factor for 
moving away from sustainability projects (CISL and UNEP FI 2014).
Four key aspects of the global macroeconomy, each slightly different, 
pointed in a cascading fashion towards a deteriorating environment 
for stepped-up climate financing over the next crucial decade 
(2020–2030), even before COVID-19. The argument is often made 
that there is enough climate financing available if the right projects 
and enabling policy actions (‘bankable projects’) present themselves 
(Cuntz et  al. 2017; Meltzer 2018). The attention to ‘bankability’ 
does not however address access and equity issues (Bayliss and 
Van Waeyenberge 2018). Some significant gains in climate financing 
at the sectoral and microeconomic levels were nevertheless 
happening in specific segments, such as solar energy financing and 
labelled green bonds (although how much of such labelled financing 
is incremental to unlabelled financing that might have happened 
anyway remains uncertain) (Tolliver et al. 2019). Issues of ‘labelling’ 
(Cornell 2020) apply even more to ESG (environmental, social and 
governance) investments, which started to grow rapidly after 2016 
(Section  15.6.5). Overall, these increments for climate finance 
remained, however, small in aggregate relative to the size of the shifts 
in climate financing required in the coming decade. Annual energy 
investments in developing regions (other than China) which account 
for two-thirds of the world population, with least costs of mitigation 
per tonne of emissions (one-half that in developed regions), and 
for the bulk of future expected global GHG emissions, saw a 20% 
decline since 2016, and only a one-fifth share of global clean energy 
investment, reflecting persistent financing problems and costs of 
mobilising finance towards clean energy transition, even prior to the 
pandemic (IEA 2021a). In the words of a macroeconomic institution, 
‘tangible policy responses to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have 
been grossly insufficient to date’ (IMF 2020a). The reason is in part 
global macroeconomic headwinds, which show a relative stagnation 
since 2016 and limited cross-border flows in particular (Yeo 2019).
was more unstable and slowing GDP growth at individual country 
levels and in aggregate because of worsening climate change impact 
events (Donadelli et al. 2019; Kahn et al. 2019). As each warmer year 
keeps producing more negative impacts – arising from greater and 
rising variability and intensity of rainfall, floods, droughts, forest fires 
and storms – the negative consequences have become more macro-
economically significant, and worst for the most climate-vulnerable 
developing countries (high confidence). Paradoxically, while these 
effects should have raised the social returns and incentives to invest 
more in future climate mitigation, a standard public policy argument, 
these macroeconomic shocks may work in the opposite direction 
for private decisions by raising the financing costs now (Cherif and 
Hasanov 2018). With some climate tipping points, potentially in 
the near-term reach (see AR6 WGI Chapter 4) the uncertainty with 
regard to the economic viability and growth prospects of selected 
macroeconomically critical sectors increases significantly (AR6 WGII 
Chapters 8 and 17). Taking account of other behavioural failures, this 
was creating a barrier for proactive and accelerated mitigation and 
adaptation action.
Public finances. The second headwind was rising public fiscal costs 
of mitigation and adapting to rising climate shocks affecting many 
countries, which were negatively impacting public indebtedness and 
country credit ratings (Cevik and Jalles 2020; Klusak et al. 2021) at 
a time of growing stresses on public finances and debt (Benali et al. 
2018; Kling et  al. 2018; Kose et  al. 2020) (high confidence). Every 
climate shock and slowing growth puts greater pressures on public 
finances to offset these impacts. Crucially, the negative consequences 
were typically greater at the lower end of income distributions 
everywhere (Acevedo et al. 2018; Aggarwal 2019). As a result, the 
standard prescription of raising distributionally adverse carbon taxes 
and reducing fossil fuel subsidies to raise resources faced political 
pushback in several countries (Copland 2020; Green 2021), and low 
rates elsewhere. Reduced taxes on capital, by contrast, was viewed 
as a way to improve growth (Bhattarai et al. 2018; Font et al. 2018), 
and working against broader fiscal action. Progress with carbon 
pricing remained modest across 44 OECD and G20 countries, with 
55–70% of all carbon emissions from energy use entirely unpriced 
as of 2018 (OECD 2021a). Climate-vulnerable countries meanwhile 
faced sharply rising cost of sovereign debt. Buhr et al. (2018) calculate 
the additional financing costs of Climate Vulnerable Forum countries 
of USD40 billion5 on government debt over the past 10 years and 
USD62 billion for the next 10 years. Including private financing cost, 
the amount increases to USD146–168 billion over the next decade.
Credit risks. The third headwind is rising financial and insurance 
sector risks and stresses (distinct from real ‘physical’ climate 
risks above) arising from the impacts of climate change, and 
systematically affecting both national and international financial 
institutions and raising their credit risks (high confidence) (Dafermos 
et al. 2018; Rudebusch 2019; Battiston et al. 2021a). Central banks 
are beginning to take notice (Carney 2019; NGFS 2019). It is also 
the case that, even if at greater risk from stranded assets in the 

deflating the values to constant USD 2015. In such cases, the unit is explicitly expressed as USD 2015.future, the large-scale financing of new fossil fuel projects by large 
global financial institutions rose significantly since 2016, because 
of perceived lower private risks and higher private returns in these 
investments and other factors than in alternative but perceived more 
risky low-carbon investments.
Global growth. The fourth headwind entering 2020 was the sharply 
slowing global macroeconomic growth, and prospects for near-
term recession (which occurred in the pandemic). During global real 
and financial cycle downturns (Jordà et  al. 2019), the perception 
of general financial risk rises, causing financial institutions and 
savers to reallocate their financing to risk-free global assets (high 
confidence). This ‘flight to safety’ was evident even before the recent 
pandemic, marked by an extraordinary tripling of financial assets to 
about USD16.5 trillion in negative-interest earning ‘safer’ assets in 

financing gap in climate finance over a decade.
15.2.3 Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The macroeconomic headwinds have worsened dramatically with the 
onset of COVID-19. Almost two years after the pandemic started, it 
is still too uncertain and early to conclude impacts of the pandemic 
until 2025–2030, especially as they affect climate finance. Multiple 
waves of the pandemic, new virus mutations, accumulating human 
toll, and growing vaccine coverage but vastly differing access across 
developed versus developing regions, are evident. They are causing 
divergent impacts across sectors and countries, which combined with 
the divergent ability of countries and regions to mount sufficient 
fiscal and monetary policy actions imply continued high uncertainty 
on the economic recovery paths from the crisis. The situation remains 
more precarious in middle- and low-income developing countries 
(IMF 2021a). While recovery is happening, the job losses have been 
large, poverty rates have climbed, public health systems are suffering 
long-term consequences, education gains have been set back, public 
debt levels are higher (5–10% of GDP higher), financial institutions 
have come under longer-term stress, a larger number of developing 
countries are facing debt distress, and many key high-contact sectors, 
such as tourism and trade, will take time to recover (Eichengreen et al. 
2021). The implication is negative headwinds for climate finance with 
public attention focused on pandemic relief and recovery and limited 
(and divergent) fiscal headroom for a  low-carbon transition, with 
considerable uncertainties ahead (Hepburn et al. 2020b; Maffettone 
and Oldani 2020; Steffen et al. 2020).
The larger and still open public policy choice question that COVID-19 
now raises is whether there is room for public policy globally and 
in respect of their individual economies to integrate climate more 
centrally to their growth, jobs and sustainable development strategies 
worldwide for ecological and economic survival. The outcomes will 
depend on the robustness of recovery from the pandemic, and the 
still evolving public policy responses to the climate agenda in the 
recovery process. Private equity and asset markets have recovered 
fiscal and central bank actions generating large excess savings 
with very low or negative yields boosting stock markets). On public 
spending, some early studies suggest that the immediate economic 
recovery packages were falling well short of being sufficiently 
climate sustainable (Gosens and Jotzo 2020; Kuzemko et al. 2020; 
O’Callaghan 2021) but several governments have also announced 
intentions to spend more on a green recovery, ‘build back better’ and 
Just Transition efforts (Section  15.2.4), although outcomes remain 
highly uncertain (Lehmann et al. 2021; Markandya et al. 2021).
An important immediate finding from the COVID-19 crisis was that the 
slowdown in economic activity is illustrating some of these choices: 
immediately after the onset, more costly and carbon-intensive coal 
use for energy use tumbled in major countries such as China and 
the USA, while the forced ‘stay-at-home’ policies adopted around the 
major economies of the world led to a –30–35% decline in individual 
country GDP , and was in turn associated with a  decrease in daily 
global CO 2 emissions by –26% at their peak in individual countries, 
and –17% globally (–11 to –25% for ±1σ) by early April 2020 
compared with the mean 2019 levels, with just under half coming 
from changes in surface transport, city congestion and country 
mobility (Le Quéré et al. 2020). Along with the carbon emissions drop 
was a dramatic improvement in other parameters such as clean air 
quality. Moreover, longer-term behavioural impacts are also possible: 
a dramatic acceleration of digital technologies in communications, 
travel, retail trade and transport. The question however is whether 
the world might revert to the earlier carbon-intensive path of 
recovery, or to a different future, and the choice of policies in shaping 
this future. Studies generally suggest that the gains from long-term 
impacts of the pandemic on future global warming will be limited 
and depend more on the nature of public policy actions and long-
term commitments by countries to raise their ambitions, not just 
on climate but on sustainable development broadly (Barbier 2020; 
Barbier and Burgess 2020; Forster et al. 2020; Gillingham et al. 2020; 
Reilly et al. 2021). The positive lesson is clear: opportunities exist for 
accelerating structural change, and for a re-orientation of economic 
activity modes to a low-carbon use strategy in areas such as coal use 
in energy consumption and surface transport, city congestion and 
in-country mobility, for which lower-cost alternatives exist and offer 
potentially dramatic gains (Hepburn et al. 2020b).
A new consensus and compact towards such a structural change and 
economic stimulus instruments may therefore need to be redrawn 
worldwide, where an accelerated low-carbon transition is a priority; 
and accelerated climate finance to spur these investments may gain 
by becoming fully and rapidly integrated with near-term economic 
stimulus, growth and macroeconomic strategies for governments, 
central banks, and private financial systems alike. If that were 
to happen, COVID-19 may well be a  turning point for sustainable 
climate policy and financing. Absent that, a return to ‘business-as-
usual’ modes will mean a likely down-cycle in climate financing and 
investments in the near term.
Expectations that the recovery package stimulus will increase economic 
activity rely on the assumption that increased credit investment 
will have a  positive effect on demand, the so-called demand-led policy (Mercure et  al. 2019). The argument for a  green recovery 
also draws on the experience from the post-global financial crisis 
in 2008–2009 recovery, in which large economies such as China, 
South Korea, the USA and the EU observed that green investments 
propelled the development of new industrial sectors. Noticeably, 
this had a  positive net effect on job creation when compared to 
the investment in traditional infrastructure (UKERC 2014; Vona 
et al. 2018; Jaeger et al. 2020). For a more in-depth discussion on 
macroeconomic-finance possible response see Section  15.6.3. 
Here, we conclude with the options for reviving a  better globally 
coordinated macroeconomic climate action. The options are some 
combinations of five possible elements:
1. Reaffirmation of a  strong financial agenda in future UNFCCC 
Conference of Parties meetings, and a  new collective finance 
target, which will need to be undertaken by 2025. Given that 
the shortfalls in financing are likely to be acute for developing 
regions and especially the more debt-stressed and vulnerable 
(Dibley et  al. 2021; Elkhishin and Mohieldin 2021; Laskaridis 
2021; Umar et al. 2021), developed countries may wish to step 
up their collective support (Resano and Gallego 2021). One 
possibility is to expedite the new Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 
issuance allocation rules for the USD650 billion recently (2021) 
approved, most of which will go to increase the reserves of G7 
and other high-income countries unless voluntarily reallocated 
towards the needs of the most vulnerable low-income countries, 
raising resources potentially ‘larger than the Marshall Plan in 
today’s money’ (IMF 2021b; Jensen 2021; Obstfeld and Truman 
2021), with decisions to be taken. Ameli et al. (2021a) note the 
climate investment trap of the current high cost of finance that 
effectively lowers green electricity production possibilities in 
Africa for a  cost optimal pathway. Other initiatives could also 
include G7 and G20 governments (especially with the lead taken 
by the developed members for cross-border support to avoid 
over-burdening public resources in developing countries) running 
coordinated fiscal deficits to accelerate the financing of low 
carbon investments (‘green fiscal stimulus’).
2. Introducing new actions, including regulatory, to take some of the 
risks off the table from institutional financial players investing in 
climate mitigation investment and insurance. This could include 
the provision of larger sovereign guarantees to such private 
finance, primarily from developed countries but jointly with 
developing countries to create a  level playing field (Dafermos 
et al. 2021) backed by explicit and transparent recognition of the 
‘social value of mitigation actions’ or SVMAs, as fiscally superior 
(because of bigger ‘multipliers’ of such fiscal action to catalyse 
private investment than direct public investment) and the bigger 
social value of such investments (Article 108, UNFCCC) (Hourcade 
et al. 2018; Krogstrup and Oman 2019).
3. Facilitating and incentivising much larger flows of cross-border 
climate financing which is especially crucial for such investments 
to happen in developing regions, where as much as two-thirds 
of collective investment may need to happen (IEA 2021a), and 
where the role of multilateral, regional and global institutions 
such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (including the 
expansion in availability of climate SDRs referred to earlier) 
could be important.
finance as an intrinsic part of their monetary policy and stimulus 
(Carney 2019; Jordà et al. 2019; Hilmi et al. 2021; Schoenmaker 
2021; Svartzman et al. 2021).
5. An acceleration of Just Transition initiatives, outlined further 
below (Section 15.2.4).
15.2.4 Climate Finance and Just Transition
Climate finance in support of a Just Transition is likely to be a key 
to a  successful low-carbon transition globally (high confidence). 
Ambitious global climate agreements are likely to work far better 
by maximising cooperative arrangements (IPCC 2018; Gazzotti et al. 
2021) with greater financing support from developed to developing 
regions in recognition of ‘common but differentiated responsibilities 
and respective capabilities’ and a  greater ethical sense of climate 
justice (Khan et al. 2020; Sardo 2020; Warner 2020; Pearson et al. 
2021). While Just Transition issues apply within developed countries 
as well (see later discussion), these are of relatively second-order 
significance to addressing climate justice issues between richer and 
poorer countries – given the scale of financing and existing social 
safety nets in the former and their absence in the latter. For example, 
over the past three decades drought in Africa has caused more 
climate-related mortality than all climate-related events combined 
from the rest of the world (Warner 2020). These issues can however 
serve both as a  bridge and a  barrier to greater cooperation on 
climate change. The key is to build greater mutual trust with clearer 
commitments and well-structured key decisions and instruments 
(Sardo 2020; Pearson et al. 2021).
The Just Transition discussion has picked up steam. It was explicitly 
recognised in the Paris Agreement and the 2018 Just Transition 
Declaration signed by 53 countries at COP24, which ‘recognised the 
need to factor in the needs of workers and communities to build 
public support for a rapid shift to a zero-carbon economy.’ Originally 
proposed by global trade unions in the 1980s, the recent discourse 
has become broader. It has coalesced into a more inclusive process 
to reduce inequality across all three areas of energy, environment 
and climate (McCauley and Heffron 2018; Bainton et  al. 2021). It 
seeks accelerated public policy support to ensure environmental 
sustainability, decent work, social inclusion and poverty eradiation 
(Burrow 2017), widely shared benefits, and protection of indigenous 
rights, and livelihoods of communities and workers who stand to 
lose (including workers in fossil fuel sectors such as coal and oil 
and gas) (UNFCCC 2018b; EBRD 2020; Jenkins et al. 2020). Because 
the process involves ‘climate justice’ and equity within and across 
generations, it involves difficult political trade-offs (Newell and 
Mulvaney 2013). The implications for a  Just Transition in climate 
finance are clear: expanding equitable and greater access to climate 
finance for vulnerable countries, communities and sectors, not just 
for the most profitable private investment opportunities, and a larger 
role for public finance in fulfilling existing finance commitments 
(Bracking and Leffel 2021; Kuhl 2021; Long 2021; Roberts et al. 2021). 
Large shocks such as pandemics, and slow-growing ones such as 
climate, are typically known to worsen inequality (IMF and World Bank 2020). Evidence from 133 countries between 2001–2018 
suggests that such shocks can cause social unrest, and migration 
pressures, especially when starting inequality is high and social 
transfers are low (Saadi Sedik and Xu 2020). Additionally, climate 
policies are more politically difficult to implement when the setting 
is one of high inequality but much less politically costly where 
incomes are more evenly distributed with stronger social safety nets 
(Furceri et al. 2021). A redrawn social compact incorporating climate 
(Beck et al. 2021) that would adopt redistributive taxes and lower 
carbon consumption, and strengthen state capacity to deliver safety 
nets, health and education with accelerated climate and environmental 
sustainability within and across countries, is increasingly recognised 
as important. Countries, regions and coordination bodies of the larger 
countries (G7, G20) have already begun such a shift to financing of 
a Just Transition, but primarily focused on the developed countries, 
although gaps remain (Krawchenko and Gordon 2021).
Such a redrawing of a social compact has happened significantly in 
the past, for example, after the 1860s ‘gilded age of capital’ with 
the enlargement of the franchise in democratisation waves in Europe 
and the Americas (Dasgupta and Ziblatt 2015, 2016). Not only was 
social conflict avoided but growth outcomes became more equitable 
and faster. Similarly, comprehensive modern social safety nets and 
progressive taxation, which started in the Great Depression and was 
extended in the post-war period, had both a positive pro-growth and 
lower inequality effects (Brida et al. 2020).
There are three levels at which policy attention on climate financing 
now may need to be focused. The first is the need to address the 
global equity issues in climate finance in a more carefully constructed 
globally cooperative public policy approach. The second is to address 
issues appropriately with enhanced support, at the national level. 
The third is to work it down further, to addressing needs at local 
community levels. Because private investors and financing mostly 
deal with allocation to climate finance at a  global portfolio level, 
then to allocation by countries, and finally to individual projects, the 
challenge for them is to refocus attention to Just Transition issues at 
the country level, but also globally as well as locally (in other words, 
at all three levels).
Climate finance will likely face greater challenges in the post-
pandemic context (Hanna et al. 2020; Henry et al. 2020). Evidence 
from the COVID-19 pandemic suggests that those in greatest 
vulnerability often had the least access to human, physical, and 
financial resources (Ruger and Horton 2020). It has also left in in 
its wake divergent prospects for economic recovery, with rising 
constraints on credit ratings and costly debt burden in many 
developing countries contrasted with the exceptionally low interest 
rate settings in developed economies driving the limited fiscal space 
in the former groups (Benmelech and Tzur-Ilan 2020). Similarly, 
monetary policies are likely to be much tighter in developing countries 
in part structurally because of the absence of ‘exceptional privilege’ 
of global reserve currencies in developed economies.
The result is a divergence in recovery prospects in the aftermath of the 
pandemic, with output losses (compared to potential) set to worsen in 
developing economies (excluding China) as compared to developed 
cooperative approach, instead of unilateralism, might work better 
(McKibbin and Vines 2020). In the case of climate, simulations clearly 
suggest the need and advantages of better coordinated climate action 
with stepped-up Paris Agreement envisaged transfers (IMF 2020b). 
Several options in international climate finance arrangements to 
support a Just Transition are both available and urgent.
As a  first priority, measures might need to accelerate a  mix of 
equitable financial grants, low-interest loans, guarantees and 
workable business models access across countries and borders, 
from developed countries to low-income countries. A  big push on 
low-carbon energy access globally, especially in large low-income 
regions such as Africa, with accelerated financial transfers, makes 
sense (Boamah 2020). For about one billion people globally at the 
base of the pyramid without access to modern low-carbon energy 
access, such an action, with enormous immediate leap-frogging 
potential, would be a key pathway to achieve the SDGs, ensure that 
high-carbon energy use is avoided, such as the burning of biomass 
and forests for charcoal, and improve air quality and public health, 
especially women’s health (van der Zwaan et al. 2018; Nathwani and 
Kammen 2019; Dalla Longa and van der Zwaan 2021; Michaelowa 
et al. 2021; Osabuohien et al. 2021).
A second priority is to accelerate the implementation of the 
USD100  billion a  year (and likely more, given growing financing 
gaps) in climate finance commitments expressed in the Copenhagen 
Agreement Accord (and reiterated since) from developed to 
developing countries, and to build greater confidence by agreeing 
rapidly on key definitions. Shifting to a grant equivalent net flows 
definition of climate finance, which is now universally accepted for 
all other aid flows by all parties since 2014 and which took effect 
since 2019 on every other public international good finance provision 
(under the SDGs), with the sole exception of climate finance, would 
resolve many uncertainties: the disbursement of climate finance flows 
on a  grant equivalent basis that is comparable across institutions, 
instruments and countries, and measurement with greater accuracy 
about the effective transfer of resources. The journey to get to a clear 
and precise definition of net official overseas development assistance 
(ODA) took time. The original proposal was first initiated in the 1960s 
(Pincus 1963) but it was not till multilateral development banks 
(MDBs) and others laid out the compelling reasons why (Chang et al. 
1998) that this was accomplished: especially to resolve decades of 
confusion and inconsistency between different types of financial 
flows and hence the perennial measurement problems and ‘the 
compromise between political expediency and statistical reality’ 
(Bulow and Rogoff 2005; Hynes and Scott 2013; Scott 2015, 2017).
A third related and increasingly crucial priority is to expedite the 
operational definition of blended finance and promote the use of 
public guarantee instruments. Private flows to accelerate the low-
carbon transition in developing countries would benefit enormously, 
by gaining clearer access to public international funds and support 
defined on a grant equivalent basis, provided development and climate 
finance operational definitions and procedures were improved on an 
urgent basis (Blended Finance Taskforce 2018a; OECD-DAC 2021). 
When blended and supported by public finance and policy, the grant equivalency measure can easily and more accurately measure the 
value and benefit of blended public and private finance by comparing 
the effective interest cost (and volume) gain with such financing, 
against the benchmark costs without such blending. Here again, 
a pressing challenge is to improve the operational definitions of what 
counts as ODA within blended finance. Blended finance remains very 
poorly defined and accounted (Pereira 2017; Andersen et al. 2019; 
Attridge and Engen 2019; Basile and Dutra 2019). Guarantees are 
expressly not included in the definition of ODA (Garbacz et al. 2021). 
As a result, bilateral and multilateral agencies have no incentive or 
limited authority and basis to use such instruments, while multilateral 
development banks continue to approach guarantees with great 
caution because of the limits of their original charters (World Bank 
2009) and require counter-indemnities by recipient countries, internal 
and historic agency inertia, perceived loss of control over the use 
of funds (compared to their preferred direct project-based lending) 
and employ restrictive accounting rules for capital provisioning of 
guarantees at 100% of their face value to maintain AAA ratings 
with credit rating agencies (Humphrey 2017; Pereira dos Santos 
and Kearney 2018; Bandura and Ramanujam 2019; Hourcade et al. 
2021a). Largely because of such official uncertainty the actual flows 
of blended finance and guarantees continue to remain a very small 
share (typically, less than 5%) of official and multilateral finance 
flows to lower project risks and costs, and hence the potential for 
large-scale accelerated low-carbon private investments in developing 
countries. Public guarantees can offer a fifteen times multiplier effect 
on the scale of low-carbon investments generated with such support, 
compared to a 1:1 ratio in direct financing (Hourcade et al. 2021a).
It makes sense to expedite these operational procedures (Khan et al. 
2020) which cannot be otherwise explained except in terms of avoiding 
responsibilities, even where the benefits would be high (Klöck et al. 
2018). It also causes (unnecessary) fragmentation and complexity 
and often ‘strategic’ ambiguity by many actors (Pickering et al. 2017), 
which worsens the possibilities for international cooperation, a critical 
requirement to achieve the Paris goals (IPCC 2018). The world would 
gain collectively if these issues were to be decided soon. The absence 
of such a collective decision continues to be exceptionally costly for 
the implementation of the Paris Agreement because of the fractious 
and seemingly insoluble negotiating climate and a breakdown of trust 
that this has created (Roberts and Weikmans 2017).
A fourth priority is expanding jobs and dealing with job losses in the 
global low-carbon transition (Carley and Konisky 2020; Crowe and Li 
2020; Pai et al. 2020; Cunningham and Schmillen 2021; Hanto et al. 
2021), especially in coal and other sectors, as well as land and other 
effects for indigenous communities (Zografos and Robbins 2020). 
Many countries, especially low-income countries, remain dependent 
on fossil fuels for their energy and exports and jobs, and support 
for their transition to a low-carbon future will be essential. Global 
recovery from the pandemic will take longer than initially envisaged 
(IMF 2021c; OECD 2021b) and an accelerated climate action for 
a Build Back Better global infrastructure plan with better and more 
resilient jobs might play a  key role as part of the Just Transitions. 
Already, there is substantial evidence (Sulich et al. 2020; Dell’Anna 
2021; Dordmond et al. 2021) that a more sustainable climate path 
would generate many more net productive jobs (with much higher 
would any other large-scale alternative. But this would nevertheless 
require a carefully managed transition globally, including access to 
much larger volumes of climate financing in developing economies 
(Muttitt and Kartha 2020). The multilateral finance institutions have 
generally played a  supportive role, expanding their financing to 
developing countries during the pandemic (even as bilateral aid flows 
have fallen sharply), but have been hampered by the constraints on 
their mandates and instruments (as noted earlier). Political leadership 
and direction will be again crucial to enhance their roles. The recent 
expansion of SDR quotas at the IMF similarly might help, but the 
current distributions of quota benefits flow primarily to the developed 
countries and do little to expand investment flows on a longer-term 
basis for a global expansion in growth and job opportunities in the 
low-carbon transition.
As a  fifth priority, transformative climate financing options based 
on equity and global sustainability objectives may also need to 
consider a greater mix of public pricing and taxation options on the 
consumption side (Arrow et al. 2004; Folke et al. 2021). Two-thirds of 
global GHG emissions directly or indirectly are linked to household 
consumption, with average per capita carbon footprint of North 
America and Europe of 13.4 and 7.5 tCO 2-eq per capita, respectively, 
compared to 1.7 in Africa and Middle East (Gough 2020) and as 
high as 200 tCO 2-eq per capita among the top 1% in some high-
income geographies versus 0.1 tCO 2-eq at the other end of the 
income distribution in some least-developed countries (Chancel 
and Piketty 2015). Globally, the highest-expenditure households 
account for eleven times the per capita emissions of lowest-
expenditure households, with rising carbon income elasticities that 
suggest ‘redistribution of carbon shares from global elites to global 
poor’ as welfare efficient (Chancel and Piketty 2015; Hubacek et al. 
2017). Within countries and regions, and within sectors, similar 
patterns hold. The top 10% of the population with the highest 
per capita footprints account for 27% of the EU carbon footprint, 
and the top 1% have a carbon footprint of 55 tCO 2-eq per capita, 
with air transport the most elastic, unequal and carbon-intensive 
consumption (Ivanova and Wood 2020). Similarly, within sectors, 
there are large differences in carbon-intensity in the building sector 
in North America (Goldstein et  al. 2020) and across cities where 
consumption-based GHG emissions vary widely across the world 
(ranging from 1.8 to 25.9 tCO 2-eq per capita).
Numerous options exist (Broeks et al. 2020; Nyfors et al. 2020) for such 
carbon consumption reduction measures, while potentially improving 
societal well-being, for example: (i) inner-city zoning restrictions 
on private cars and promoting walking/bicycle use and improved 
shared low-carbon transport infrastructure; (ii) advertising regulation 
and carbon taxes and fees on high-carbon luxury status goods and 
services; (iii) subsidies and exemptions for low-carbon options, higher 
value-added taxes on specific high-carbon products and services, 
subsidies for public low-carbon options such as commuter transport, 
and other behavioural nudges (Reisch et al. 2021); and (iv) framing 
options (emphasising total cost of car over lifetimes), mandatory 
smart metering, collective goods and services (leasing, renting, 
sharing options) and others. Finally, reducing subsidies on fossil fuels, 
raising the progressivity of taxes and raising overall wealth taxes on the richest households, which have been sharply falling (Scheuer and 
Slemrod 2021) even as global income and wealth have risen, with 
regressive and falling overall taxes (Alvaredo et al. 2020; Saez and 
Zucman 2020), could effectively generate significant revenues (over 
1% of GDP yr–1), about the same size as the proposed global USD50 
pertonne carbon price proposed and estimated by the IMF/OECD 

interest costs on overall decarbonisation initiatives and financing of 
green new deals (Schroeder 2021).
These five options identified above on near-term actions and 
priorities will however, require greater collective political leadership. 
A review of past crisis episodes suggests that collective actions to 
avoid large global or multi-country risks work well primarily when 
the problems are well defined, a small number of actors are involved, 
solutions are relatively well established scientifically, and public 
costs to address them are relatively small (Sandler 1998, 2015) (for 
example, dealing with early pandemic outbreaks such as Ebola, 
TB, and cholera; extending global vaccination programmes such as 
smallpox, measles and polio; early warning systems and actions for 
natural disasters such as tsunamis, hurricanes/cyclones and volcanic 
disasters; the Montreal Protocol for ozone-depleting refrigerants, 
and renewables wind and solar energy development). They do not 
appear to work as well for more complex global collective action 
problems which concern a  number of economic actors, sectors, 
without inexpensive and mature technological options, and where 
political and institutional governance is fragmented. Greater 
political coordination is needed because the impacts are often not 
near term or imminent, but diffuse, slow moving and long term, 
and where preventive disaster avoidance is costly even when these 
costs are  low compared to the longer-term damages  – till tipping 
points are reached of the need for reduced ‘stressors’ and increasing 
‘facilitators’ (Jagers et al. 2020). But by then, it may be too late.
Private institutional investors equally might equally wish to pay 
greater attention to the Just Transition finance issues. It would be 
useful for investors to identify ways to support to such initiatives, 
and more clearly identify the benefits of such transition measures 
envisaged by both countries and investment financing proposals, 
including incorporating Just Transition consideration in their support 
to broader ESG and green financing initiatives.
The second level of attention needed on Just Transitions has to 
do with inequities within a  large country setting, developed or 
developing. The Just Transition issue exists within developed 
countries as well. As the ongoing pandemic illustrates, the first 
climate burden hit is often felt most acutely at the level of states 
and cities, with many smaller ones without enough fiscal capacity 
or ability to mount an adequate discretionary counter policy. Only 
national governments have the ability to borrow more in their fiscal 
accounts to address large collective problems, whether pandemics 
or climate change. Therefore, it is important that national policies 
and funds be available for programmes to address the Just Transition 
issues for larger subnational states, cities and regions. This would be 
helped by countries including Just Transition initiatives in their NDCs 
for financing (as South Africa has recently done), and attention by 
external financing agencies and MDBs to large-scale adverse impacts 
Deal plans (Nae and Panie 2021) include several initiatives (focusing 
on industries, regions and workers adversely affected, with explicit 
programmes to address them).
The third level of argument is for a shift in focus from an exclusive 
attention to financing of mitigation and low-carbon new 
investments projects to also better understanding and addressing 
the local adverse impacts of climate change on communities and 
people, who are vulnerable and increasingly dispossessed due to 
losses and damages from climate change or even those who are 
impacted by decarbonisation measures in the fossil fuel sectors and 
transportation, as well as those who are harmed by polluting sectors: 
indigenous men and women, minorities and generally the poor. It is 
evident that very few resources are available to countries, investors, 
civil society, and smaller development institutions seeking to achieve 
a just transition (Robins and Rydge 2020).
Finally, greater support is warranted for smaller towns and cities, local 
networks, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), communities, 
local authorities and universities for projects, research ideas and 
proposals (Lubell and Morrison 2021; Moftakhari et al. 2021; Stehle 
2021; Vedeld et al. 2021).
15.3 Assessment of Current Financial Flows
15.3.1 Financial Flows and Stocks: Orders of Magnitude
Assessments of finance for climate action need to be placed within 
the broader perspective of all investments and financing flows and 
stocks. This section provides aggregate level reference points of 
relevance to the remainder of this chapter, notably when assessing 
current levels of climate and fossil fuel-related investments and 

deflating the values to constant USD 2015. In such cases, the unit is explicitly expressed as USD 2015.financing (Sections  15.3.2.3 and 15.3.2.4 respectively), as well 
as estimates of investment and financing needed to meet climate 
objectives (Section 15.4).
Measures of financial flows and stocks provide complementary 
and interrelated insights into trends over time: the accumulation 
of flows, measured per unit of time, results in stocks, observed at 
a given point in time (IMF 2009; UN and ECB 2015). On the flows 
side, GDP , a System of National Accounts (SNA) statistical standard 
that measures the monetary value of final goods and services 
produced in a country in a given period of time. In 2020, global GDP 
represented above USD 2015 70 trillion6 (down from around 80 trillion 
USD 2015 in 2019), out of which developed countries represented 
approximately 60% (Figure 15.1); a slowly decreasing share over 
the last years. The GDP metric is useful here as an indicator of the 
level of activity of an economy but gives no indication relating to 
human well-being or SDG achievements (Giannetti et al. 2015) as it 
counts positively activities that negatively impact the environment, 
without making deductions for the depletion and degradation of 
natural resources.
Gross-fixed capital formation (GFCF), another SNA standard that 
covers tangible assets (notably infrastructure and equipment) and 
intangible assets, is a good proxy for investment flows in the real 
economy. In 2019, global GFCF reached around 20 trillion USD 2015 
compared to around 14 trillion USD 2015 in 2010, a more than 40% 
increase (Figure  15.2). Global GFCF represents about a  quarter of 
global GDP , a relatively stable ratio since 2008. This share is, however, 
much higher for emerging economies, notably in Asia, which are 
building new infrastructure at scale. As analysed in  Sections  15.4 
and 15.5, infrastructure investment needs and gaps in developing 
countries are significant. How these are met over the next 
decade will critically influence the likelihood of reaching the Paris 
Agreement goals.















Africa Developed Asia and 
Developing
PaciﬁcLatin America Eurasia Middle East
Figure 15.1 | Financial flows – GDP (trillion USD 2015) by type of economy (left) and region (right).  Note: Regional breakdown based on official UN country 
classification. GDP in trillion USD 2015. Source: World Bank Data (2020a). Numbers represent aggregated country data. Last updated data on 15 September 2021. CC BY-4.0.
On the stock side, an increasingly significant portion of the growing 
value of financial capital (stocks in particular) may be disconnected 
from the value of underlying productive capital in the real economy 
(Igan et  al. 2020). This trend, however, remains uneven between 
developed countries, most of which have relatively deep capital 
markets, and developing countries at different stages of development 
(Section  15.6.7). Bonds, a  form of debt financing, represent 
a significant share of total financial assets. As of August 2020, the 
overall size of the global bond markets (amount outstanding) was 
estimated at approximately USD128.3 trillion, out of which over two 
thirds was from ‘supranational, sovereign, and agencies’, and just 
under a third from corporations (ICMA 2020b). As discussed later in 
the chapter, since AR5, an increasing number and volume of bonds 
have been earmarked for climate action but these still only represent 
less than 1% of the total bond market. As of end-2020, climate-
aligned bonds outstanding were estimated at USD0.9 trillion (Giorgi 
and Michetti 2021), though already raising concerns in terms of both 
underlying definitions (Section 15.6.6) and risks of increased climate-
related indebtedness (Section 15.6.1, 15.6.3).From the perspective of climate change action, these orders of 
magnitude make it possible to highlight the relatively small size 
of current climate finance flows and relatively larger size of remaining 
fossil fuel-related finance flows (discussed in the following two sub-
sections), as well as, more generally, the significant overall scale 
of financial flows and stocks that have to be made consistent with 
climate goals. These orders of magnitude further make it possible to 
put in perspective climate-related investment needs (Section 15.4) 
and gaps (Section 15.5).
15.3.2 Estimates of Climate Finance Flows
The measurement of climate finance flows continues to face similar 
definitional, coverage and reliability issues as at the time of AR5 and 
the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, despite progress 
made (more sources, greater frequency, and some definitional 
improvements) by a  range of data providers and collators. Based 
on available estimates (Table 15.1 and Figure 15.3), flows of annual 101520


DevelopedDeveloping LDC
Africa Developed Asia and 
PaciﬁcLatin America Eurasia Middle East2010










classification. GDP in trillion USD 2015. Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) includes land improvements (fences, ditches, drains, and so on); plant, machinery, and equipment 
purchases; and the construction of roads, railways, and the like, including schools, offices, hospitals, private residential dwellings, and commercial and industrial buildings. Source: 
World Bank Data (2020b). Data for 2020 not available. Last updated data on 15 September 2021. CC BY-4.0.
Table 15.1 | Total climate finance flows between 2013 and 2020.
Source (type) 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
UNFCCC SCF (total high) 687 584 680 681 Published after lit. cut-off n/a n/a
Deflated to USD 2015 706 590 680 674
UNFCCC SCF (total low/CPI) 339 392 472 456 /608 /540 /623 /640
Deflated to USD 2015 349 396 472 451 /590 /513 /581 /590
Note: CPI: Climate Policy Initiative; SCF: Standing Committee on Finance. Numbers in current billion USD. Deflated to USD 2015 in italic. Given the variations in numbers reported 
by different entities, changes in data, definitions and methodologies over time, there is low confidence attached to the aggregate numbers presented here. The higher bound 
reported in the SCF’s Biennial Assessment reports includes estimates from the International Energy Agency on energy efficiency investments, which are excludes from the lower 
bound and CPI’s estimates. Sources: UNFCCC (2018a); Buchner et al. (2019); Naran et al. (2021).
global climate finance are on an upward trend since AR5, reaching 
a high-bound estimate of USD681 billion in 2016 (UNFCCC 2018a), 
representing USD674 billion 2015. Latest available estimates indicate 
a  drop in 2018 (Buchner et  al. 2019) and a  rebound in 2019 and 

comparable in terms of scope, current climate finance flows remain 
small (approx. 3%) compared to the GFCF reference point introduced 
in Section 15.3.1, and need to be put in perspective with remaining 
fossil fuel financing (medium confidence) (Section 15.3.2.3).
At an aggregate level, in both developed and developing countries, 
the vast majority of tracked climate finance is sourced from domestic 
or national markets rather than cross-border financing (Buchner et al. 
2019). This reinforces the point that national policies and settings 
remain crucial (Section 15.6.2), along with the development of local 
capital markets (Section 15.6.7).
Climate finance in developing countries remains heavily concentrated 
in a few large economies (high confidence), with Brazil, India, China 
and South Africa accounting for around one-quarter to more than 
a third depending on the year, a share similar to that represented 
by developed countries. Least-developed countries (LDCs), on 
the other hand, continue to represent less than 5% year-on-year 
(medium confidence) (BNEF 2019; Buchner et al. 2019). Further, the 
relatively modest growth of climate finance in developed countries is 
a matter of concern given that economic circumstances are, in most 
cases, relatively more amenable to greater financing, savings and 
affordability than in developing countries.
At a global level, the majority of tracked climate finance is assessed 
as coming from private actors (Buchner et al. 2019), although, the 
boundaries between private and public finance include significant 
grey zones (Box 15.2), which implies that different definitions could 
lead to different conclusions (Yeo 2019; Weikmans and Roberts 2019). However, private investments in climate projects and activities often 
benefit from public support in the form of co-financing, guarantees 
or fiscal measures. In terms of financial instruments and mechanisms, 
debt as well as balance sheet financing (which can rely on both 
own resources and further debt) and project financing (combining 
a large debt portion and smaller equity portion) represent the lion’s 
share. In this context, the rapid rise of climate-related bond issuances 
since AR5 (Giorgi and Michetti 2021) represents an opportunity 
for scaling up climate finance but also poses underlying issues of 
integrity (Nicol et al. 2018a; Shishlov et al. 2018) and additionality 
(Schneeweiss 2019), as further discussed in Section  15.6.5, and 
needs to be considered in the context of overall indebtedness and 
debt sustainability (Sections 15.6.1 and 15.6.3).
Mitigation continues to represent the lion’s share of global climate 
finance (consistently above 90% between 2017 and 2020), and in 
particular renewable energy, followed by energy efficiency and 
transport (high confidence) (UNFCCC 2018a; Buchner et  al. 2019). 
While capacity additions on the ground kept rising, falling technology 
costs in certain sectors (e.g., solar energy) has had a negative impact 
on the year-on-year trend that can be observed in terms of volumes 
of climate finance (BNEF 2019; IRENA 2019a). However, such cost 
reduction could free up investment and financing capacities for 
potential use in other climate-related activities.
Tracking adaptation finance continues to pose significant challenges 
in terms of data and methods. Notably, the mainstreaming of 
resilience into investments and business decisions makes it difficult 
to identify relevant activities within financial datasets (Agrawala 
et  al. 2011; Brown et  al. 2015; Averchenkova et  al. 2016). Despite 
these limitations, evidence shows that finance for adaptation 
remains fragmented and significantly below rapidly rising needs 
(Section  15.4 and Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE: Finance for 
Adaptation and Resilience in Chapter  17 of AR6 WGII report).  0 Type of economy Sector

DevelopedDeveloping LDC
No sector Electricity Other
Agriculture 
and ForestEnergy 
EfﬁciencyTransport Policy Waste water100200300400500600700







Figure 15.3 | Available estimates of global climate finance between 2014 and 2020.  Note: Numbers in current billion USD. Deflated to USD 2015 see Table 15.1 in italic.  
Type of Economy figure (left): Regional breakdown based on official UN country classification. ‘0’ no regional mapping information available. Sectoral figure (right):  Policy includes 
Disaster Risk Management; Policy and national budget support and capacity building. Transport includes Sustainable/Low-carbon Transport. Energy Efficiency includes Industry, 
Extractive Industries, Manufacturing & Trade, Low-carbon Technologies, Information and Communications Technology, Buildings and Infrastructure. Electricity includes Renewable 
Energy Feneration, “Infrastructure, energy and other built environment”, Transmission and Distribution Systems, and Energy Systems. No sector means no sector information 
available, or negligible flows. Other includes Non-energy GHG reductions, Coastal Protection. Source: own calculations, based on Naran et al. (2021).
Issues of Method
In 2009, at COP15, Parties to the UNFCCC agreed the following: ‘In the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency 
on implementation, developed countries commit to a goal of mobilising jointly USD100 billion a year by 2020 to address the needs 
of developing countries. This funding will come from a wide variety of sources, public and private, bilateral and multilateral, including 
alternative sources of finance’ (UNFCCC 2009).
This goal is further embedded as a target under SDG 13 Climate Action. While the parameters for what and how to count were not 
defined when the goal was set, progress in this area has been achieved under the UNFCCC (UNFCCC 2019b) and via a UN-driven 
independent expert review (Bhattacharya et al. 2020).
There remain well documented interpretations and debates on how to account for progress (Clapp et al. 2012; Stadelmann et al. 
2013; Jachnik et al. 2015; Weikmans and Roberts 2019). Different interpretations relate mainly to the type and proportion of activities 
that may qualify as ‘climate’ on the one hand, and to how to account for different types of finance (and financial instruments) on 
the other hand. As an example, there are different points at which financing can be measured, for example, pledges, commitments, 
disbursements. There can be significant lags between these different points in time, for example disbursements may spread over 
time. Further, the choice of point of measurement can have an impact on both the volumes and on the characteristics (geographical 
origin, labelling as public or private) of the finance tracked. The enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement may 
lead to improvements and more consensus in the way climate finance is accounted for and reported under the UNFCCC. Available 
analyses specifically aimed at assessing progress towards the USD100 billion goal remain rare, for example the UNFCCC SCF Biennial 
Assessments do not directly address this point (UNFCCC 2018a). Dedicated OECD reports provide figures based on accounting for 
gross flows of climate finance based on analysing activity-level data recorded by the UNFCCC (bilateral public climate finance) and 
the OECD (multilateral public climate finance, mobilised private climate finance and climate-related export credits) (OECD 2015a; 
OECD 2019a; OECD 2020b). For 2018, the OECD analysis resulted in a total of USD78.9 billion, out of which USD62.2 billion of public 
finance, USD2.1 billion of export credits and USD14.5 billion of private finance was mobilised. Mitigation represented 73% of the total, 
adaptation 19% and cross-cutting activities 8%.
Reports by Oxfam provide a complementary view on public climate finance, building on OECD figures and underlying data sources 
to translate gross flows of bilateral and multilateral public climate finance in grant equivalent terms, while also, for some activities, 
applying discounts to the proportion considered as climate finance (Carty et al. 2016; Carty and Le Comte 2018; Carty et al 2020). 
The resulting annual averages for 2015–2016 and 2017–2018 range between 32% (low bound) and 44% (high bound) of gross 
public climate finance. The difference with OECD figures stems from the high share represented by loans, both concessional and non-
concessional, in public climate finance, that is, 74% in 2018 (OECD 2020b).
A point of method that attracts much attention relates to how to account for private finance mobilised. The OECD, through its 
Development Assistance Committee, established an international standard to measure private finance mobilised by official 
development finance, which consists in methods tailored to different financial mechanisms. These methods take into account the role 
of, risk taken, and/or amount provided by all official actors involved in a given project, including recipient country institutions, thereby 
also avoiding risks of double counting (OECD 2019b). MDBs apply a different method (World Bank 2018a) in their joint climate finance 
reporting (AfDB et al. 2020), which neither correspond to the geographical scope of the USD100 billion goal, nor address the issue of 
attribution to the extent required in that context.
Notwithstanding methodological discussions under the UNFCCC, there is still some distance from the USD100 billion a  year 
commitment being achieved, including in terms of further prioritising adaptation. While the scope of the commitment corresponds to 
only a fraction of the larger sums needed (Section 15.4), its fulfilment can both contribute to climate action in developing countries 
as well as to trust building in international climate negotiations. Combined with further clarity on geographical and sectoral gaps, 
this can, in turn, facilitate the implementation of better coordinated and cooperative arrangements for mobilising funds (Peake and 
Ekins 2017).
understand and address the interlinkages between climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction (DRR) towards achieving 
resilience (OECD 2020a). Watson et  al. (2015) however, note that 
between 2003 and 2014, of the USD2 billion that flowed through 
dedicated climate change adaptation funds, only USD369 million 
explicitly went to DRR activities (Climate Funds Update 2014; 
Nakhooda et al. 2014a; Nakhooda et al. 2014b; Watson et al. 2015). 
For the private sector, insurance and reinsurance remain the dominant 
way to transfer risk as discussed in Section 15.6.4).
More generally, significant gaps remain to track climate finance 
comprehensively at a global level:
• Available estimates are based on a good coverage of investments 
in renewable energy and, where available, energy efficiency and 
transport, while other sectors remain more difficult to track, such 
as industry, agriculture and land use (high confidence) (UNFCCC 
2018a; Buchner et al. 2019).
• In contrast to international public climate finance, domestic 
public finance data remain partial despite initiatives to track 
domestic climate finance (e.g.,  Hainaut and Cochran 2018) 
and public expenditures (high confidence) (for instance based 
on the UNDP’s Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional 
Review approach).
Data on private and commercial finance remain very patchy, 
particularly for corporate financing (including debt financing 
provided by commercial banks), for which it is difficult to establish 
a link with activities and projects on the ground (high confidence). 
Further, as individual sources of aggregate reporting (UNFCCC 
2018a; Buchner et al. 2019; FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2020) tend to 
rely on the same main data sources (notably the BNEF commercial 
database for renewable energy investments) as well as to cross-
check numbers against similar other sources, there is a potential for 
‘group-think’ and bias.
Such data gaps as well as varying definitions of what qualifies as 
‘climate’ (or more broadly as ‘green’ and ‘sustainable’) not only pose 
a  measurement challenge. They also result in a  lack of clarity for 
investors and financiers seeking climate-related opportunities. Such 
uncertainty can lead both to reduced climate finance as well as to 
a lack of transparency in climate-related reporting (further discussed 
in Section 15.6.1), which in turn further hinders reliable measurement.
In terms of finance provided and mobilised by developed countries for 
climate action in developing countries, while accounting scope and 
methodologies continue to be debated (Box 15.4), progress has been 
achieved on these matters in the context of the UNFCCC (UNFCCC 
2019b). A consensus, however, exists, on a need to further scale up 
public finance and improve its effectiveness in mobilising private 
finance (OECD 2020b), as well as to further prioritise adaptation 
financing, in particular towards the most vulnerable countries (Carty 
et al. 2020). The relatively low share of adaptation in international 
climate finance to date may in part be due to a low level of obligation 
and precision in global adaptation rules and commitments (Hall and 
Persson 2018). Further, providers of international climate finance may have more incentive to support mitigation over adaptation as 
mitigation benefits are global while the benefits of adaptation are 
local or regional (Abadie et al. 2013).
15.3.3 Fossil Fuel-related and Transition Finance
As called for by Article 2.1c of the Paris Agreement and introduced 
in Section  15.3.1, achieving the goal of the Paris Agreement of 
holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 
2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels requires 
making all finance consistent with this goal. Data on investments 
and financing to high GHG activities remain very partial and 
difficult to access, as relevant actors currently have little incentive 
or obligations to disclose such information compared to reporting 
on and communicating about their activities contributing to climate 
action. Further, the development of methodologies to assess 
finance for activities misaligned with climate mitigation goals, for 
hard- and costly-to-abate sectors such as heavy industries, as well 
as for activities that eventually need to be phased out but can play 
a  transition role for a  given period, remain work in progress. This 
results in limited empirical evidence to date.
In modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with no or 
limited overshoot, however, make it clear that the share of fossil fuels 
in energy supply has to decrease (see Chapter 3). For instance, the 
International Energy Agency (IEA) Net Zero by 2050 scenario relies 
on halting sales of new internal combustion engine passenger cars 
by 2035, rapid and steady decrease of the production of coal (minus 
90%), oil (minus 75%) and natural gas (minus 55%) by 2050, and 
phasing out all unabated coal and oil power plants by 2040 (IEA 
2021b). To avoid locking GHG emissions incompatible with remaining 
carbon budgets, this implies a rapid scaling down of new fossil fuel-
related investments, combined with a scaling up of financing to allow 
energy and infrastructure systems to transition (high confidence).
The IEA provides comprehensive analyses of global energy 
investments, estimated at about USD1.8 trillion a year over 2017–


investments represent about 8% of global GFCF (Section 15.3.2.1). 
In the power sector, fossil fuel-related investments reached an 
estimated USD120 billion yr–1 on average over 2019–2020, which 
remains well above the level that underpin the IEA’s own Paris-
compatible Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) and Net Zero 
Emission (NZE) scenarios. The IEA observes a similar inconsistency 
for supply-side new investments: in 2019–2020 on average yr–1, an 
estimated USD650 billion were invested in oil supply and close to 
USD100 billion in coal supply. These estimates also result in fossil 
fuel investments remaining larger in aggregate than the total 
tracked climate finance worldwide (Section  15.3.2.2). For oil and 
gas companies, which are amongst the world’s largest corporations 
and sometimes government owned or backed, low-carbon solutions 
are estimated to represent less than 1% of capital expenditure 
(IEA 2020b). As discussed in the remainder of this chapter, shifting 
investments towards low-GHG solutions requires a combination of 
as the availability of financing to finance such a transition.
In terms of financing provided to fossil fuel investments, available 
analyses point out a still significant role played by commercial banks 
and export credit agencies. Commercial banks provide both direct 
lending as well as underwriting services, the latter facilitating capital 
raising from investors in the form of bond or share issuance. Available 
estimates indicate that lending and underwriting extended over 
2016– 2019 by 35 of the world’s largest banks to 2100 companies 
active across the fossil fuel lifecycle reached USD687 billion yr–1 on 
average (Rainforest Action Network et al. 2020). Official export credit 
agencies, which are owned or backed by their government, de-risk 
exports by providing guarantees and insurances or, less often, loans. 
In 2016–2018, available estimates indicate the provision of about 
USD31 billion yr–1 worth of fossil fuel-related official export credits, 
out of which close to 80% was for oil and gas, and over 20% for coal 
(DeAngelis and Tucker 2020).
Finance for new fossil fuel-related assets lock in future GHG 
emissions that may be inconsistent with remaining carbon budgets 
and, as discussed above, with emission pathways to reach the Paris 
Agreement goals. This inconsistency exposes investors and asset 
owners to the risk of stranded assets, which results from potential 
sharp strengthening climate public policies, that is, transition risk. As 
a result, a growing number of investors and financiers are assessing 
climate-related risks with the aim to disclose information about their 
current level of exposure (to both transition and physical climate-
related risks), as well as to inform their future decisions (TCFD 2017). 
Reporting to date is, however, inconsistent across geographies and 
jurisdictions (CDSB and CDP 2018; Perera et  al. 2019), with also 
a wide variety of metrics, methodologies, and approaches developed 
by commercial providers that contribute to disparate outcomes 
(Kotsantonis and Serafeim 2019; Boffo and Patalano 2020). Further, 
as developed in Section 15.6.1, there is currently not enough evidence 
in order to conclude whether climate-related risk assessments result 
in increased climate action and alignment with the goals of the Paris 
Agreement (The 2° Investing Initiative and Wüest Partner 2020).
As developed in Section  15.6.3, the insufficient level of ambition 
and coherence of public policies at national and international 
levels remains the root cause of the still significant misalignment 
of investment and financing compared to pathways compatible 
with the Paris Agreement temperature goal (UNEP 2018). Such lack 
of coherence includes low pricing of carbon and of environmental 
externalities more generally, as well as misaligned policies in non-
climate policy areas such as fiscal, trade, industrial and investment 
policy, and financial regulation (OECD 2015b), as further specified in 
the sectoral Chapters 6 to 12.
The most documented policy misalignment relates to the remaining 
very large scale of public direct and indirect financial support for 
fossil fuel-related production and consumption in many parts of 
the world (Bast et al. 2015; Coady et al. 2017; Climate Transparency 
2020). Fossil fuel subsidies are embedded across economic sectors as 

most countries, import tariffs and non-tariff barriers are substantially 
lower on relatively more CO 2 intensive industries (Shapiro 2020). 
Available inventories of fossil fuel subsidies (in the form of direct 
budgetary transfers, revenue forgone, risk transfers, or induced 
transfers), covering 76 economies, indicate a rise to USD340 billion 
in 2017, a  5% increase compared to 2016. Such trend is due to 
slowed down progress in reducing support among OECD and G20 
economies in 2017 (OECD 2018b) and to a rise in fossil fuel subsidies 
for consumption in several developing economies (Matsumura 
and Adam 2019), which, in turn, reduces the efficiency of public 
instruments and incentives aimed at redirecting investments and 
financing towards low-GHG activities.
As a  result, the demand for fossil fuels, especially in the energy 
production, transport and buildings sectors, remain high, and the 
risk-return profile of fossil fuel-related investments is still positive 
in many instance (Hanif et al. 2019). Political economy constraints of 
fossil fuel subsidy reform continue to be a major hurdle for climate 
action (Schwanitz et  al. 2014; Röttgers and Anderson 2018), as 
further discussed in Section 15.5.2. and Chapter 13.
15.4 Financing Needs
15.4.1 Definitions of Financing Needs
Financing needs7 are discussed in various contexts, only one being 
international climate politics and finance. Also, financing needs are 
used as an indicator for required system changes (when compared 
to current flows and asset bases) and an indicator for near- to long-
term investment opportunities from the perspective of investors 
and corporates. Investment needs are widely used as an indicator 
focusing on initial investments required to realise new infrastructure. 
It compares relatively well with private sector flows dominated 
by return-generating investments but lacks comparability and 
explanatory power regarding the needs in the context of international 
climate cooperation, where considerations on economic costs play 
a more substantial role. Chapter 12 elaborates on global economic 
cost estimates for various technologies. This indicator includes both 
costs and benefits of options, of which investment-related costs 
make up only one component. Both analyses offer complementary 
insights. There are financing needs not directly related to the 
realisation of physical infrastructure and which are not covered 
in both investment and cost estimates. For instance, the needs for 
building institutional capacity to achieve social and economic goals 
and to strengthen knowledge, skills, national and international 
cooperation might not be significant, but an enabling environment 
for future investments would not be established without satisfying it. 
Moreover, comprehending financial needs for addressing economic 
losses due to climate change can hardly be measured in terms of the 
indicators introduced before.
Understanding the magnitude of the challenge to scale up finance in 
sectors and regions requires a more comprehensive (and qualitative) 
transition, domestic and international public interventions can be 
needed to ensure enough supply of finance across sectors, regions 
and stakeholders. The location of financing needs and vicinity to 
capital matter given home bias (Fuchs et  al. 2017; OECD 2017a; 
Ito and McCauley 2019) (prioritising own country or regions), 
transaction costs and risk considerations (Section 15.2). Most of the 
finance is mobilised domestically but the depth of capital markets is 
substantially greater in developed countries, increasing the challenges 
to mobilise substantial volumes of additional financing for many 
developing countries. The same applies to various stakeholders with 
limited connections into the financial sector. In addition, governments 
enabling financial market frameworks, guidelines and supportive 
infrastructure is crucial for inclusive finance for the bottom of the 
pyramid, especially disadvantaged and economically marginalised 
segments of society.
The attractiveness of a sector and region for capital markets depends 
on several factors. Some essential elements are the duration of loan 
and profile as long-term loans and heavily heterogeneous returns 
represent challenges in financing mitigation technologies and 
policies. After the financial crisis and restricted access to long-term 
debt, capital intensity of technologies and resulting long payback 
periods of investment opportunities for mitigation technologies have 
been a crucial challenge (Bertoldi et al. 2021). Also, implicit discount 
rates applied during the investment decision process vary depending 
on the payback profile, with research mainly covering the difference 
between the financing of assets generating revenues versus costs 
(Jaffe et al. 2004; Schleich et al. 2016). In addition, a low correlation 
between the climate projects and dominating asset classes might 
provide an opportunity in climate action by satisfying the appetite 
of institutional investors, which tend to manage portfolios with 
consideration of the Markowitz modern portfolio theory (optimising 
return and risk of a portfolio through diversification) (Marinoni et al. 
2011). Transaction cost is a significant barrier to the diffusion and 
commercialisation of low-carbon technologies and business models 
and adaptation action. High transaction costs, attributed to various 
factors, such as complexity and limited standardisation of investments, 
limited pipelines, complex institutional and administrative procedures, 
create significant opportunity costs of green investments comparing 
with other standard investments (IRENA 2016; Nelson et al. 2016; 
Feldman et al. 2018). For example, transaction costs are commonly 
observed in small-scale, dispersed independent renewable energy 
systems, especially in rural areas, and energy efficiency projects 
(Hunecke et al. 2019). A more robust standardisation and alignment of 
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) terms with best practices globally 
has led to a  substantially increased interest in capital markets in 
developing countries (WBCSD 2016; Schmidt et al. 2019; World Bank 
2021). Notably, PPA significantly increases the probability of more 
balanced investment and development outcomes and ultimately 
more sustainable independent power projects in developing 
countries. Therefore, lowering transaction costs would be essential 
for creating investor appetite. The role of intermediaries bundling 
demand for financing has been demonstrated to reduce transaction 
costs and to reach investors’ critical size. In addition, new innovative 
approaches, such as fintech and blockchain (Section  15.6.8), have 
been discussed for providing new opportunities in the energy sector.Economic viability of investments – ideally not relying on the pricing 
of positive externalities  – has been a  critical driver of momentum 
in the past. The falling technology costs and the competitiveness 
of renewable technologies, especially solar PV and wind, have 
accelerated the deployment of renewable technologies over the past 
years. Renewable energy technologies are now often competitive, 
and have even become the cheapest, in many countries, even without 
financial support (FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2015, 2016, 2017, 
2018, 2019; IEA 2020c; IRENA 2020a) and without pricing of the 
avoided carbon emissions. In contrast, the dependency on regulatory 
interventions and public financial support to create financial viability 
has provided a source of volatile investor appetite. The annual volume 
of renewable investment by country is often volatile, reflecting ending 
and new regulations and policies (IEA 2019a).
For example, the recent Chinese policy direction towards tougher 
access to and a  substantial cut in feed-in-tariffs in 2018 led to 
a significant drop in renewable investment and new capacity addition 
in China (FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2019; Hove 2020). However, the 
significant bouncing back of newly installed capacity (72 GW wind 
power and 47 GW solar power in 2020) shows the strong development 
of zero-carbon power generation driven by lower cost and policies to 
support them by energy revolution strategies in China. Investors had 
proven to be willing to work with transparent support mechanisms, 
such as with the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), which 
stimulated emission reductions and allowed industrialised countries 
to implement emission-reduction projects in developing countries to 
meet their emission targets (Michaelowa et al. 2019). However, the 
collapse of carbon markets and prices, especially of the EU Emissions 
Trading System, led to the continuous decline of Certified Emission 
Reductions issuances from CDM in the past years (World Bank Group 
2020). Also, the dependency on regulatory intervention to ensure fair 
market access only has proven to burden investor appetite.
A significant share of investment needs in heavily regulated sectors, 
such as electricity, public transport, and telecom, emphasises the 
importance of regulatory intervention, such as ownership and market 
access (OECD 2017b). For instance, energy-system developments 
require effective and credible commitments and action by 
policymakers to ensure an efficient capital allocation aligned with 
climate targets (Bertram et al. 2021).
There is a  lot of discussion about the regulated ownership of the 
private sector (European Commission 2017) and the restructuring of 
electricity market contributed to low level of investment in baseline 
electricity capacity and in investment research and innovation. These 
changes create uncertainty of investment, and barriers to market 
entry and exit also potentially limit the competition in the market 
and restrict the entrance of new investment (Finon 2006; Joskow 
2007; Grubb and Newbery 2018). This is also the case in developing 
countries (Foster and Rana 2020).
The positive development in the energy sector has benefitted from 
the evident stand-alone character of renewable energy generation 
projects. First movers realised these projects with investors and 
developers acting from conviction (Steffen et al. 2018). Such action is 
not possible to this extent in energy efficiency with related investment 
requiring the support of decision-makers used to business-as-usual 
projects. Despite the benefits that improvement of energy efficiency 
has in contributing to curbing energy consumption, mitigating 
greenhouse gas emissions, and providing multiple co-benefits (IEA 
2014a), investment in energy efficiency is a low priority for firms, and 
the financial environment is not favourable due to lack of awareness 
of energy efficiency by financial institutions, existing administrative 
barriers, lack of expertise to develop projects, asymmetric information, 
and split incentives (UNEP DTU 2017; Cattaneo 2019). While Energy 
Service Companies’ (ESCO) business models are expected to facilitate 
the investment in energy efficiency by sharing a portion of financial 
risk and providing expertise, there has been limited progress made 
with ESCO business models, and only slightly over 20% of projects 
used financing through ESCOs (UNEP DTU 2017).
The investment needs and existing challenges differ by sector. Each 
sector has different characteristics along the arguments listed above 
making the supply of finance by commercial investors an enabling 
factor or barrier. In the transport sector, transformation towards green 
mobility would provide significant co-benefits for human health by 
reducing transport-related air pollution, so the transport sector cannot 
achieve such transformation in isolation from other sectors. However, 
a considerable involvement of the public sector in many transportation 
infrastructure projects is given, and the absence of a standard solution 
increases transaction costs (including bidding package, estimating, 
drawing up a contract, administering the contract, corruption, and 
so on). Financial constraints, including access to adequate finance, 
pose a significant challenge in the agriculture sector, especially for 
SMEs and smallholder farmers. The distortion created by government 
failure and a lack of effective policies create barriers to financing for 
agriculture. The inability to manage the impact of the agriculture-
related risks, such as seasonality, increases uncertainty in financial 
management. Moreover, inadequate infrastructure, such as electricity 
and telecommunication, makes it difficult for financial institutions to 
reach agricultural SMEs and farmers and increases transaction costs 
(World Bank 2016). Low economies of scale, low bargaining power, 
poor connectivity to markets, and information asymmetry also lead 
to higher transaction costs (Pingali et  al. 2019). In the industrial 
manufacturing and residential sector, gaining energy efficiency 
remains one of the critical challenges. Investment in achieving energy 
efficiency encounters some challenges when it may not necessarily 
generate direct or indirect benefits, such as increase in production 
capacity or productivity and improvement in product quality. Also, 
early-stage, high upfront cost and future, stable revenue stream 
structure suggest the needs for a better enabling environment, such 
as a robust financial market, awareness of financial institutions, and 
regulatory frameworks (e.g., stringent building codes, incentives for 
ESCOs) (IEA 2014a; Barnsley et al. 2015).
15.4.2 Quantitative Assessment of Financing Needs
Multiple stakeholders prepare and present quantitative financing 
needs assessments with methodologies applied to vary significantly 
representing a major challenge for aggregation of needs (e.g., Osama 
et  al. (2021) for African countries), most of them with a  focus on scenarios likely to limit warming to 2°C or lower. The differences 
relate to the scope of the assessments regarding sectors, regions and 
periods, top-down versus bottom-up approaches, and methodological 
issues around boundaries of climate-related investment needs, 
particularly full vs incremental costs and the exclusion or inclusion 
of consumer-level investments. Information on investment needs 
and financing options in NDCs mirrors this challenge and is heavily 
heterogeneous (Zhang and Pan 2016).
In particular, for global approaches, modelling assumptions are often 
heavily standardised, focusing on technology costs. Only limited 
global analysis is available on incremental costs and investments, 
reflecting the reality of developing countries, also considering the 
interplay with significant infrastructure finance gaps, and can hardly 
serve as a robust basis for negotiations about international public 
climate finance. The focus on investment irrespective of uncertainty 
as well as other qualitative aspects of needs does not allow for 
a straightforward analysis of the need for public finance to leverage 
private sector financing and of the country heterogeneity in terms of 
investment risks and access to capital (Clark et al. 2018).
One source of uncertainty about the investment estimates for the 
power sector is the evolution of the levelised cost of technical 
options in the future, for example the continuation of the observed 
declining costs trends of renewable energy (IRENA 2020b) which has 
been underestimated in many modelling exercises. The learning by 
doing processes and economies of scale might be at least partially 
outweighed, in all countries and more specifically in Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS) and other developing countries because of 
different risk factors, scales of installations, accessibility, and others 
(Lucas et  al. 2015; van der Zwaan et  al. 2018). These parameters, 
together with transaction costs/soft costs (Section  15.5), financing 
costs and the level of technical competences need to be better 
represented in the future to represent the ‘climate investment trap’ 
in many developing countries (García de Fonseca et al. 2019). This 
‘climate investment trap’, as flagged by Ameli et al. (2021a), is created 
by existing and expected physical effects of climate change, higher 
financing costs and resulting lower investment levels in developing 
countries. Applying significantly standardised assumptions can 
consequently not provide robust insights for specific country groups. 
This will require progress in the spatiotemporal granularity of the 
models (Collins et al. 2016).
Another source of uncertainty about the financing needs is the 
interplays between (i) the baseline economic growth rates, (ii) the link 
between economic growth and energy demand, including rebound 
effects of energy efficiency gains, (iii) the evolution of microeconomic 
parameters such as fossil fuel prices, interest rates, currency 
exchange rates (iv) the level of integration between climate policies 
and sectoral policies and their efficacy, and (v) the impact of climate 
policies on growth and the capacity of fiscal and financial policies 
to offset their adverse effect (IPCC 2014; IPCC 2018). Integrated 
assessment models (IAMs) try to capture some of these interplays 
even though they typically do not capture the financial constraints 
and the structural causes of the infrastructure investment gap. Many 
of them rely on growth models with full exploitation of the means 
of production (labour and capital). They nevertheless provide useful 
the determinants of their uncertainty. Global yearly average low-
carbon investment needs until 2030 for electricity, transportation, 
AFOLU and energy efficiency measures including industry and 
buildings are estimated between 3% and 6% of the world’s GDP 
according to the analysis in Section 15.5. The incremental costs of 
low-carbon options are less than that and their funding could be 
achieved without reducing global consumption by reallocating 
1.4% to 3.9% of global savings. 2.4% on average (see Box 4.8 of 
SR1.5 (IPCC 2018)) currently flow towards real estate, land and liquid 
financial vehicles. For the short-term decisions, the major information 
they give is the uncertainty range because this is an indicator of the 
risks decision-makers need.
While the AR6 Scenarios Database provides good transparency with 
regard to technology costs for electricity generation, assumptions 
driving in particular investments in energy efficiency are rarely made 
available in both IAM-based assessments and also other studies. 
Taking into account the much broader range of tested and untested 
technologies the confidence levels, in particular for 2050 estimates, 
remain low but can provide an initial indication. Also, the ranges 
allow for a rough indication on possible ‘green’ investment volumes 
and respective asset allocation for financial sector stakeholders.
Using global scenarios assessed in Chapter  3  for assessing 
investment requirements. Tables  15.2 and 15.3 present the 
analysis of investment requirements in global modelled mitigation 
pathways assessed in Chapter 3 for key energy sub-sectors within 
modelled global pathways that limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or 
lower. These pathways explore the energy, land-use, and climate 
system interactions and thus help identify required energy sector 
transformations to reach specific long-term climate targets. However, 
reporting of investment needs outside the energy sector was scarce, 
reducing the explanatory power of the shown total investment need 
in the context of overall investment needs (Ekholm et  al. 2013; 
IPCC 2018, Box 4.8; McCollum et al. 2018; Bertram et al. 2021). The 
modelling of these scenarios is done with a  variation of scenario 
assumptions along different dimensions (inter alia policy, socio-
economic development and technology availability), as well as with 
different modelling tools which represent different assumptions about the structural functioning of the energy-economy-land-
use system (see Annex III: ‘Scenarios and modelling methods’ for 
details). Tables 15.2 and 15.3 focus on the near-term (2023–2032) 
investment requirements in the energy sector and how these differ 
depending on temperature category. Figures 3.36 and 3.37 present 
the data for the medium term (2023–2052). The results highlight 
both requirements for increased investments and a shift from fossil 
towards renewable technologies and efficiency for more ambitious 
temperature categories. The substantial ranges within each category 
reflect multiple pathways, differentiated by socio-economic 
assumptions, technology, and so on. It is necessary to open up these 
extra dimensions and contrast them with national and sub-regional 
analysis to understand how investment requirements depend 
on particular circumstances and assumptions within a  country 
for a  specific technology. Limiting peak temperature to levels of 
1.5°C–2°C requires rapid decarbonisation of the global energy 
systems, with the fastest relative emission reductions occurring in the 
power generation sector (Hirth and Steckel 2016; Luderer et al. 2018).
This requires fast shifts of investment as infrastructures in the power 
sector generally have long lifetimes of a  few decades. in global 
modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C (>50%) with no 
or limited overshoot, investments into non-biomass renewables 
(especially solar and wind, but also including hydro, geothermal, and 
others not shown in Table 15.2) increase to over USD1 trillion yr–1 
in 2030, increasing by more than factor 3 over the values of around 
USD250–300 billion yr–1 that have been relatively stable over the 
last decade (IEA 2019a). Overall, electricity generation investments 
increase considerably, reflecting the higher relevance of capital 
expenditures in decarbonised electricity systems. While decreasing 
technology costs have substantially reduced the challenge of high 
capital intensity, still remaining relative disadvantages in terms of 
capital intensity of low-carbon power technologies can especially 
create obstacles for fast decarbonisation in countries with high 
interest rates, which decrease the competitiveness of those 
technologies (Iyer et al. 2015; Hirth and Steckel 2016; Steckel and 
Jakob 2018; Schmidt et  al. 2019). CCS as well as nuclear will not 
drive investment needs until 2030, given considerably longer lead-
times for these technologies, and the lack of a  significant project 
pipeline currently.
Table 15.2 | Global average yearly investments from 2023–2032 for electricity supply in billion USD 2015.
Category Fossil Nuclear StorageTransmission 
and distributionNon-Biomass Renewables
AllThereof
Solar Wind
C1 53 [50] 127 [52] 221 [39] 549 [50] 1190 [52] 498 [52] 390 [52]
(Range) (34;115) (85;165) (88;295) (422;787) (688;1430) (292;603) (273;578)
C2 78 [100] 116 [92] 57 [66] 489 [81] 736 [96] 312 [96] 237 [96]
(Range) (50;129) (61;150) (37;139) (401;620) (482;848) (181;385) (174;328)
C3 75 [221] 96 [190] 28 [129] 389 [157] 639 [207] 220 [207] 266 [207]
(Range) (52;129) (50;122) (8;155) (326;760) (432;820) (167;345) (137;353)
Note: Global average yearly investments from 2023–2032 (in USD 2015). Electricity subcomponents are not exhaustive. Hydro, geothermal, biomass and others are not shown, as these 
are shown to be of smaller magnitude (Chapter 3). Difference between non-biomass renewables and solar/wind represents hydro and in some scenarios geothermal, tidal, and ocean. 
Scenarios are grouped into common AR6 categories (vertical axis, C1–C3). The numbers represent medians across all scenarios within one category, and rounded brackets indicate 
inter-quartile ranges, while the numbers in squared brackets indicate number of scenarios. C6, C7, and C8 are not shown in Table 15.2. Reference C5 category for Transmission and 
Distribution (T&D) is 364bn (294bn to 445bn) [111] used for calculation of incremental needs in Figure 15.4. Data source: AR6 Scenarios Database.
What is apparent is that the bulk of investment requirements 
corresponds to medium- and low-income countries in Asia, Latin 
America, the Middle East and Africa, as these still have growing 
energy demand, and it is still considerably lower than the global 
average. This illustrates a vital opportunity to ensure the build-up of 
sustainable energy infrastructures in these regions and constitutes 
a  risk of additional carbon lock-in if investments into fossil infrastructures, especially coal-fired power plants, and uncontrolled 
urban expansion, continue.
Investment needs in electrification derived from IAMs do not 
include systematically investments in end-use equipment and 
distribution (Box 4.8 in SR1.5 (IPCC 2018)). Model-based estimates 
of investment needs don’t have the regional granularity to single out Table 15.3 | Regional average yearly investments from 2023–2032 for electricity supply in billion USD 2015.
AfricaEast
AsiaEuropeSouth
AsiaLatin 
AmericaMiddle
EastNorth 
AmericaAustralia, 
Japan, 
and New 
ZealandEast. Eur. 
W.C. AsiaSouth 
East Asia
Non-biomass renewables
C1 41 [39] 302 [41] 130 [41] 120 [41] 69 [41] 67 [41] 177 [41] 37 [41] 48 [41] 85 [41]
(Range) (36;66) (188;356) (101;150) (83;164) (55;97) (31;90) (149;222) (28;39) (35;65) (59;141)
C2 32 [77] 179 [87] 95 [87] 69 [87] 55 [87] 28 [87] 106 [87] 19 [87] 17 [87] 63 [87]
(Range) (27;42) (124;255) (64;104) (35;84) (27;73) (19;43) (73;134) (12;29) (10;37) (35;78)
C3 17 [170] 166 [185] 91 [185] 53 [182] 53 [185] 22 [182] 119 [185] 22 [179] 15 [185] 38 [182]
(Range) (12;47) (108;200) (42;118) (35;80) (25;81) (11;32) (71;167) (12;30) (11;30) (22;67)
Thereof solar
C1 16 [39] 134 [41] 43 [41] 53 [41] 22 [41] 33 [41] 81 [41] 11 [41] 20 [41] 33 [41]
(Range) (8;24) (89;147) (38;55) (37;82) (14;34) (16;40) (75;95) (10;16) (10;25) (17;56)
C2 10 [77] 83 [87] 34 [87] 37 [87] 16 [87] 15 [82] 44 [87] 7 [80] 5 [81] 20 [87]
(Range) (6;14) (54;125) (19;47) (17;41) (8;21) (10;23) (18;69) (4;10) (1;12) (9;33)
C3 7 [170] 53 [185] 28 [184] 23 [182] 12 [184] 12 [164] 32 [185] 9 [157] 8 [164] 14 [182]
(Range) (3;14) (42;83) (17;36) (17;39) (5;25) (9;20) (21;74) (4;11) (3;12) (7;27)
Thereof wind
C1 10 [39] 133 [41] 59 [41] 45 [41] 19 [41] 22 [41] 58 [41] 20 [41] 17 [41] 28 [41]
(Range) (4;30) (86;164) (29;86) (23;71) (15;26) (13;39) (44;122) (12;25) (10;23) (17;52)
C2 5 [77] 63 [87] 41 [83] 23 [87] 15 [87] 8 [81] 31 [87] 8 [87] 4 [81] 19 [87]
(Range) (4;14) (44;102) (9;59) (14;30) (7;18) (3;16) (19;75) (5;12) (2;12) (6;23)
C3 3 [170] 64 [185] 59 [169] 21 [182] 12 [184] 10 [160] 52 [184] 10 [179] 4 [164] 10 [182]
(Range) (2;15) (40;93) (12;65) (12;37) (7;22) (5;13) (19;86) (6;13) (2;10) (5;32)
Storage
C1 3 [27] 68 [32] 46 [32] 27 [32] 7 [29] 13 [30] 56 [30] 4 [32] 3 [24] 15 [30]
(Range) (0;8) (30;80) (9;54) (24;45) (2;11) (3;19) (30;62) (2;6) (0;4) (1;30)
C2 2 [36] 19 [60] 18 [52] 10 [57] 3 [42] 3 [31] 13 [44] 1 [43] 0 [20] 3 [41]
(Range) (0;4) (6;36) (7;35) (4;17) (1;8) (0;4) (11;34) (1;2) (0;0) (2;13)
C3 4 [78] 20 [106] 22 [92] 9 [107] 9 [85] 4 [78] 29 [81] 1 [90] 0 [78] 9 [83]
(Range) (0;6) (1;33) (3;41) (1;21) (0;13) (0;9) (2;42) (0;2) (0;1) (0;16)
Transmission and distribution
C1 24 [39] 147 [39] 67 [39] 51 [39] 40 [39] 27 [39] 87 [39] 16 [39] 24 [39] 64 [39]
(Range) (13;39) (96;250) (61;105) (46;97) (29;62) (22;40) (70;120) (13;19) (18;35) (26;94)
C2 24 [77] 132 [77] 60 [77] 49 [77] 36 [77] 33 [77] 70 [77] 14 [77] 26 [77] 36 [77]
(Range) (14;30) (84;175) (48;79) (43;56) (28;45) (27;37) (53;92) (8;19) (17;34) (28;61)
C3 14 [150] 93 [153] 61 [153] 46 [150] 26 [153] 25 [150] 70 [153] 14 [147] 23 [153] 26 [150]
(Range) (10;37) (74;190) (52;86) (38;86) (21;62) (17;40) (52;90) (11;16) (17;27) (17;87)
C5 13 [109] 81 [110] 55 [110] 41 [109] 25 [110] 23 [109] 58 [110] 14 [109] 23 [110] 25 [109]
(Range) (9;13) (67;160) (46;59) (22;46) (19;28) (15;28) (51;67) (12;16) (16;26) (17;29)
Note: Average yearly investments from 2023–2032 for electricity generation capacity, by aggregate regions (in billion USD 2015). Further notes see Table 15.2. Reference C5 
category for Transmission and Distribution shown in Table 15.2 as it is used for calculation of incremental needs for Figure 15.4. Vertical axis, C4–C8 except Transmission and 
Distribution not shown. Data source: AR6 Scenarios Database.
proximity and therefore aggregate LDCs and other countries. With 
the average electricity consumption per capita in Africa increasing 
to 0.68–0.87 (1.43–2.92) MWh in 2030 (2050) yr–1 and remaining 
at the very low end of the global range [0.46 in Africa compared 
to the upper end of 12.02 in North America, MWh per capita and 
year in 2020], the targeted full electrification until 2030 appears 
unrealistic across all scenarios. SEforAll and IEA estimate assumed 
investment needs to decentralised end-user electrification to come 
in around USD40 billion on average until 2030 (SEforALL and CPI 
2020; IEA 2021d).
Quantitative analysis of investment needs in energy 
generation based on IRENA and IEA data and comparison 
to AR6 scenario database output.
According to IRENA, the government plans in place today call 
for investing at least USD95 trillion in energy systems over the 
coming three decades (2016–2050) (IRENA 2020c). Redirecting and 
increasing investments to ensure a climate-safe future (Transforming 
Energy Scenario, TES) would require reaching on average around 

as well as grids and storage, increasing to above 2 trillion USD 2015 yr–1 
(average until 2030) in the 1.5 scenario (IRENA 2021). IEA’s respective 
SDS and NZE scenarios come in at average annual investments 
between USD1.0  trillion yr–1 and USD1.6 trillion yr–1 (average until 
2030) (IEA 2021b). These additional data points for the C1 and C3 
category underpin the range presented in the AR6 Scenarios Database 
for needs until 2032 despite the slightly varying periods.
In contrast to the IAMs, IRENA and IEA assessments do not allow 
for an analysis of mitigation-driven investment needs in transmission 
and distribution, which likely results in an overestimation of the 
mitigation-driven investment needs in their analysis.
It is worth highlighting that driven by technology cost assumptions, 
IRENA forecasts falling average annual investments needs for energy, 
but also energy efficiency, for the period 2030–2050 compared to 
2020–2030. In the 1.5°C scenario (1.5-S) the total annual investment 
needs excluding fossils and nuclear decrease from 5.0 trillion USD 2015 
until 2030 yr–1 to 3.8 trillion USD 2015 yr–1 for 2030–2050 (IRENA 
2021). In IAM scenarios of Category C1, electricity supply investments 
(including generation, transmission and distribution, and storage) 
remain flat at 2.2 trillion USD 2015 yr–1 through the coming three 
decades in absolute terms. Given rising GDP , the complementary 
methods and sources thus consistently point to a peak in electricity 
supply investments as a percentage of GDP in mitigation scenarios 
in the coming decade. This reflects the fact that the coming decade 
requires low-carbon power generation investments to both cover 
the demand increase and (partly premature) replacement of fossil 
generation capacities, both concentrated in emerging and developing 
countries. Relative investment numbers for electricity measured 
against GDP then decrease towards 2050, as they only need to 
cover natural replacement and increasing demands (which due 
to electrification will also pick up in developed countries), and due to 
further declining technology costs. Investments for low-carbon fuel supply like hydrogen and synthetic fuels, and for direct electrification 
equipment (heat pumps, electric vehicles (EV), etc.) scale up from 
much lower levels and will likely continue to grow as a share of GDP 
until mid-century, though uncertainties and accounting is still much 
more uncertain. (Bertram et al. 2021).
Quantitative analysis of investment needs in other sectors. 
As described above, investment needs in non-energy sectors tend to 
be ignored in many integrated assessment models with studies for 
individual countries or regions providing a more fragmented picture 
only. However, the quality of estimates is likely not to be less robust 
given the drawbacks of integrated assessment models.
Chapter  7  stresses the importance of opportunity costs for AFOLU 
mitigation options, in particular for afforestation and avoided 
deforestation projects, and derives net annual costs of around 
USD278 billion yr–1 in the next several decades, mostly opportunity 
costs. Net costs of delivering 5-6 Gt CO 2 yr–1 of forest related carbon 
sequestration and emission reduction around 2050 as assessed with 
sectoral models are estimated to reach to ~ USD400 billion yr–1 by 
2050, excluding externality costs (Chapter 7.4).
Energy efficiency. Estimates on energy investment needs vary 
significantly with a low level of transparency with regard to underlying 
technology cost assumptions burdening the confidence levels.
IRENA only selectively reports financing needs for energy 
efficiency in buildings and industry as separate categories. For the 
1.5-S average yr–1 needs until 2050 come in at 963 billion USD 2015 
for buildings, 102 billion USD 2015 for heat pumps, and 354 billion 
USD 2015 for industry. Applying the relative share of these categories 
on higher total needs until 2030, around 1.8 trillion USD 2015  yr–1 
in buildings and industry are needed in the 1.5-S.  For the TES 
cumulative energy efficiency investment needs until 2030 are stated 
at 29 trillion USD 2015 translating into an yearly average of around 
1.7  trillion USD 2015 yr–1, excluding transportation. IEA estimates 
come in at a much lower level at 0.6 and 0.8 billion USD 2015 yr–1 on 
average between 2026–2030 for their SDS and NZE scenarios.
Transportation. For the transportation sector, OECD has presented 
the most comprehensive assessment of financing needs in the AR6 
database based on IEA data with the annual average coming in at 
USD2.7 trillion between 2015 and 2035 i In modelled global pathways 
that limit warming to 2°C (>67%). The assessment comprises road, 
rail and airports/ports infrastructure, with only rail infrastructure 
being considered in this analysis.
On a regional level, Oxford Economics (2017) shows that annual 
infrastructure investments between 2016 and 2040 vary widely. 
For all available countries (n=50) estimates count close to 
0.4 trillion USD 2015 yr–1, including 0.217 trillion USD 2015 yr–1 for China. 
Based on available data for nine African countries, investments in rail 
infrastructure range from USD0.1 billion in Senegal to USD1.6 billion 
in Nigeria. Osama et al. (2021) highlight a USD4.7 billion financing gap 
for African countries in the transport sector. In Latin America Oxford 
Economics (2017) identifies Brazil as frontrunner of required rail 
investments with USD8.3 billion, followed by Peru with USD2.3 billion. 
USD120 billion yr–1 (n=15, mean=7.97bn USD) for rail infrastructure. 
Financing needs in developing countries (excluding LDCs and excluding 
China) mount up to almost USD50 billion yr–1 (n=27, mean=1.78bn USD, 
excluding China). Oxford Economics (2017) reports rail infrastructure 
financing needs for China of more than USD200 billion yr–1 between 

Fisch-Romito and Guivarch (2019) show, by endogenising the impact 
of urban infrastructure policies on mobility needs and modal choices 
that transportation investment needs globally might be lower in low-
carbon pathways compared with baselines, with lower investments in 
road and air infrastructure. This does mean that higher investments 
are not needed over the following two decades; this is confirmed by 
Rozenberg and Fay (2019) that strong policy integration between urban, 
transportation and energy policies reduce the total investment gap.
IRENA as well as IEA have presented estimates for energy efficiency 
investments in the transport sector. For the 1.5-S scenario, IRENA 
indicates average investment needs of USD 2015 0.2 trillion yr–1 for EV 
infrastructure, USD 2015 0.2 trillion yr–1 for transport energy efficiency 
and USD 2015 0.3 trillion yr–1 for EV batteries (average until 2030) (IRENA 
2020d). IEA indicates a total of around 0.6 and 0.7 trillion USD 2015 yr–1 
for transport energy efficiency in the SDS and IEA scenarios for the 
2026–2030 period (IEA 2021c). Many investment categories relating to 
mitigation options, in particular with regard to behavioural change and 
transport mode changes (Chapter 10, Figure SPM.8), are neglected in 
these analyses despite their significant mitigation potential.
AFOLU.  The Food and Land Use Coalition estimates additional 
investment needs for ten critical transitions for the global food and 
land use systems to achieve the long-term global goal (LTGG) 
and  SDGs. Additional annual investment needs until 2030 add up 
to USD300–350 billion. Considering the change in global diets 
as well as the land-based nature-based solutions only, annual 
investment needs would come in between USD110–135 billion. Chapter  7  stresses the importance of opportunity costs for AFOLU 
mitigation options, in particular for afforestation projects, and derives 
average yearly investment needs of around 278 billion USD 2015 yr–1 
until 2030 rising to 431 billion USD 2015 yr–1 over the next several 
decades, including opportunity costs. The estimate is based on 
an assumption of emission reductions consistent with pathways 
C1–C4, leading to average abatement of 9.1 GtCO 2 yr–1 (median 
range 6.7–12.3 GtCO 2 yr–1) from 2020–2050 and marginal costs 
of USD100 per tonne CO 2, excluding investments in bioenergy with 
carbon capture and storage and changes in food consumption and 
food waste (Section  7.4). The largest investments are projected to 
occur in Latin America, South-East Asia, and Africa, constituting 61% 
of total expenditure. The implied change of land use might trigger 
negative effects on other SDGs which need to be addressed to offer 
robust safeguards and labelling for investors.
However, given the strong interlinkage of the presented transitions 
and accumulated effects, climate change related investments 
can hardly be separated (The Food and Land Use Coalition 2019). 
Shakhovskoy et  al. (2019) present an overview of financing needs 
of small-scale farmers globally, however, without focusing on the 
required climate-related investments. According to their assessment, 

Saharan Africa and Latin America face approximately USD240 billion 
of financing needs, thereof USD100 billion short-term agricultural 
needs, USD88 billion long-term agricultural needs and USD50 billion 
non-agricultural needs (Shakhovskoy et  al. 2019). These numbers 
can only provide ‘an indication of the magnitude of the climate 
investments required in small-scale agriculture’ (CPI 2020). 
Table 15.4 summarises the studies used as well as adjustments made 
to determine needs for the gap discussion in Section 15.5.2.
Adaptation financing needs. Financing needs for adaptation 
are even more difficult to define than those of mitigation because 
mobilising specific adaptation investments is only part of the challenge 
since ultimately improving societies’ adaptive capacities depends on 
Table 15.4 | Sector studies to determine average financing needs.
Sector StudiesGlobal ranges trillion USD 
yr–1 – Confidence LevelRegional breakdown Comment
EnergyIAM database, SEforAll (SEforALL and CPI 2020), 
IRENA 1.5-S and TES scenarios (IRENA 2021), 
IEA SDS and NZE scenarios (IEA 2021b)0.8–1.5 High confidenceDetailed breakdown for 
R10 possible for IAM 
database and applied 
to the derived rangeMedium 
confidenceWide ranges primarily driven by varying 
assumptions with regard to grid 
investments relating to the increased 
renewable energy penetration.
Energy 
EfficiencyIRENA 1.5-S and TES scenarios, IEA SDS  
and NZE scenarios0.5–1.7Medium 
confidenceAdjustments required to 
regional categorisation 
by IEA and IRENALow-medium 
confidenceMedium confidence levels due to missing 
transparency with regard to underlying 
assumptions on technology costs. Low-
to-medium confidence level on regional 
allocations due to required adjustments.
TransportOECD/IEA (OECD 2017b) and Oxford Economics 
(2017) on rail investment data, IRENA 1.5-S and 
TES scenarios, IEA SDS and NZE scenarios for 
transport (energy efficiency) and electrification1.0–1.1Medium 
confidenceAdjustments required to 
regional categorisation 
by IEA and IRENALow-medium 
confidenceNeeds including battery costs, not 
total costs, of electric vehicles, likely 
underestimation of needs due to missing 
data points on rail infrastructure.
AFOLUChapter 7 analysis, Section 7.4; The Food and 
Land Use Coalition (Land use Coalition (2019); 
(Shakhovskoy et al. 2019)0.1–0.3 High confidenceBreakdown for 
R10 possible for 
Chapter 7 analysisMedium 
confidenceUpper end of range includes opportunity 
costs as these likely increase costs of 
investment in land.
Note: Total range USD2.3 trillion to USD4.5 trillion yr–1.
gap on irrigation, water supply, health care, energy access, and quality 
buildings is an essential enabling condition for adapting to climate 
change. The scenario analysis conducted by Rozenberg and Fay (2019) 
show that fulfilling the SDGs to improve the adaptive capacity of low- 
and middle-income countries would require investments in water 
supply, sanitation, irrigation and flood protection that would account 
for about 0.5% of developing countries’ GDP in a baseline scenario 
to 1.85% and 1% with a  strong and anticipatory policy integration 
(USD664 billion and 351 billion on average by 2030).
Most studies choose to assess public sector projects, ignoring 
household-level investments as well as private sector adaptation 
(UNEP 2018; Buchner et al. 2019). UNEP’s 2020 Adaptation Gap Report 
estimates adaptation costs amounting to 140–300 billion  USD  yr–1 
in 2030 and USD280–500 billion yr–1 in 2050 (UNEP 2021). Over 

NDCs (INDCs) and approximately 25% of these referenced national 
adaptation plans (NAPs) (GIZ 2017a) but estimates of the financing 
required for NAP processes is not available. These NAPs, as formally 
agreed under the UNFCCC in 2010, are iterative, continuous processes 
that have multiple stages with a developmental phase that requires 
country-specific financing of primarily which comprises grants, bond 
issuance or debt conversion (NDC Partnership 2020, NAP Global 
Network 2017). At the same time, multilateral climate funds such as the 
Green Climate Fund and the GEF/Least Developed Countries Fund offer 
‘readiness and preparatory support’ and implementation for the NAPs 
and adaptation planning process (GCF 2020a; GEF 2021a,b). There has 
been no significant updating of adaptation cost estimates since UNEP’s 
(UNEP 2016, 2018). The Global Commission on Adaptation makes the 
case that investing USD1.8 trillion in early warning system, climate-
resilient infrastructure, global mangrove and resilient water resources 
would generate about USD1.7 trillion in benefits due to avoided cost 
and non-monetary and social resources (Verkooijen 2019; UNEP 2021).
There is increasing recognition of rising adaptation challenges and 
associated costs within and across developed countries. Undoubtedly 
many developed countries are spending more on a  wide range of 
adaptation issues, both as preventive measures and building 
resilience (greening infrastructure, climate-proofing major projects 
and managing climate-related risks) against the impacts of climate 
change extreme weather events (US GCRP 2018a). Developed 
countries’ climate change adaptation spending covers areas such as 
federal insurance programmes, federal, state and local property and 
infrastructure, supply chains, and water systems.
15.5 Considerations on Financing Gaps 
and Drivers
15.5.1 Definitions
The analysis of financing gaps in climate action, which is used to 
measure implementation action and mitigation impact (FS-UNEP 
Centre and BNEF 2019) cannot be carried out as a  pure demand-
side challenge, in isolation from the analysis of barriers to deploy 
funds (e.g.,  Ramlee and Berma 2013) and to take investment initiatives. These barriers are ‘friction that prevents socially optimal 
investments from being commercially attractive’ (Druce et al. 2016). 
They are at the root of the ‘microeconomic paradox’ of a deficit of 
infrastructure investments despite a  real return between 4% and 
8% (Bhattacharya et  al. 2016), of the low share of carbon-saving 
potentials tapped by dedicated policies such as energy renovation 
programmes (Ürge-Vorsatz et  al. 2018), and, more generally of 
a demand for climate finance lower than the volume of economically 
viable projects (de Gouvello and Zelenko 2010; Timilsina et al. 2010).
A few exercises tried assess the consequences of the perpetuation of 
these drivers on the magnitude of the financing gap. They suggest, 
comparing the evolution of the infrastructure investment trends 
(beyond energy) by comparison with what they should be in an optimal 
scenario, a cumulative deficit between 19% (Oxford Economics 2017) 
and 32% (Arezki et al. 2016). The volume of this gap is of the same order 
of magnitude as the incremental infrastructure investments (energy and 
beyond) for meeting a 1.5°C target (2.4% of the world GDP on average) 
(Box 4.8 of SR1.5 (IPCC 2018)) calculated by exercises assuming no 
pre-existing investment gap. This figure is consistent with the 1.5% 
to 1.8% assessed by the European Commission (2020) for Europe and 
the 2% of the IMF (2021d) for the G20, which do not encompass many 
developing countries for which economic take-off is today fossil fuels 
dependent. For low- and middle-income economies, Rozenberg and 
Fay’s (2019) results suggest to increase the infrastructure investments 
by 2.5 to 6 percentage points of GDP to cover both the reduction of the 
structural investment gap and the specific additional costs for bridging 
it with low-carbon and climate-resilient options. These assessments 
indicate the challenge at stake but do not exist at very disaggregated 
sectoral and regional levels for sectors other than energy.
The below quantitative analysis does not differentiate between 
financing gaps driven by barriers within or outside the financial sector 
given that the IAM models as well as most other studies used do 
not incorporate actual risk ranges depending on policy strength and 
coherence and institutional capacity, low-carbon policy risks, lack of 
long-term capital, cross-border currency fluctuation, and pre-investment 
costs and barriers within the financial sector that discourage private 
sector financing. They comprise short-termism (UNEP Inquiry 2016b), 
high perceived risks for mitigation-relevant technologies and/or 
regions (information gap through incomplete/asymmetric information, 
(Kempa and Moslener 2017; Clark et  al. 2018)), lack of carbon 
pricing effects (Best and Burke 2018), home bias (results in limited 
balancing for regional mismatches between current capital and needs 
distribution, (Boissinot et  al. 2016)), and perceived high opportunity 
and transaction costs (results from limited visibility of future pipelines 
and policy interventions; SME financing tickets and the missing middle, 
(Grubler et al. 2016)). In addition, barriers outside the financial sector 
will have to be addressed to close future financing gaps. The mix and 
dominance of individual barriers might vary significantly across sectors 
and regions and is analysed below.
The interpretation of the quantitative analysis thus needs to be 
performed, taking into account the qualitative needs assessment in 
Section 15.4.1 and the evolution of parameters that determine the risk-
weighted relative attractiveness of low-carbon and climate-resilient 
investments compared to other investment opportunities. With some 
targets (see also Box 15.4), the actual asset allocation of commercial 
financial sector players including sectoral and regional focus will 
respond to tangible and financially viable investment opportunities 
available in the short term. Robust long-term pathways to create 
such conditions for a  significant private sector involvement rarely 
exist and expectations on private sector involvement in some critical 
sectors/regions might be too high (Clark et al. 2018).15.5.2 Identified Financing Gaps for Sector and Regions
The following section compares recent climate finance flows as 
reported by CPI and IEA to needs derived in Section 15.4, ignoring the 
slight mismatch in time horizons. The analysis ignores interlinked gaps, 
in particular infrastructure investment gaps and other SDG-related 
investment gaps, which need to be addressed in parallel to reach the 
LTGG but also at least partially to facilitate green investments.
By sector
By type of economyEnergy efﬁciency
Developing countries
By region
Europe
Eastern Europe and West-Central AsiaLatin America and Caribbean
Africa
Middle EastNorth America
Australia, Japan and New Zealand
South-East Asia and PaciﬁcSouthern AsiaDeveloped countriesAgriculture, forestry and other land useElectricityTransport
Eastern Asia

Lower
rangeUpper
range
x10 x31x2 x5
x3
x5
x6x7 x14
x12
x14 x28x12x3x4x2x3 x6
x4
x7 x15x5x4 x7x7
x7 x7
x2 x4x2
x8
x7
Multiplication factors indicate the x-fold 
increase between yearly mitigation ﬂows 
to average yearly mitigation investment needs. 
Globally, current mitigation ﬁnancial ﬂows 
are a factor of three to six below the average 
levels up to 2030.2017

Annual mitigation investment 
needs (averaged until 2030)IEA data mean 
2017–2020Average ﬂows Yearly mitigation 
investment ﬂows 
(USD2015 yr –1) in:*Actual yearly ﬂows compared to average annual needs (billion USD 2015 yr –1)
Figure 15.4 | Breakdown of recent average (downstream) mitigation investments and model-based investment requirements for 2020–2030 (USD billion) 
in scenarios that likely limit warming to 2°C or lower. Mitigation investment flows and model-based investment requirements by sector / segment (energy efficiency in 
buildings and industry, transport including efficiency, electricity generation, transmission and distribution including electrification, and agriculture, forestry and other land use), by 
type of economy, and by region (see Annex II Part I Section 1: By region is based on intermediate level (R10) classification scheme. By type of economy is based on intermediate 
level (R10) classification scheme, which considers ‘North America’, ‘Europe’, and ’Australia, Japan and New Zealand’ as developed countries, and the other seven regions as 
developing countries). Breakdown by sector / segment may differ slightly from sectoral analysis in other contexts due to the availability of investment needs data. The granularity 
of the models assessed in Chapter 3, and other studies, do not allow for a robust assessment of the specific investment needs of LDCs or SIDSs. Investment requirements in 
developing countries might be underestimated due to missing data points as well as underestimated technology costs. In modelled pathways, regional investments are projected 
to occur when and where they are cost cost-effective to limit global warming. The model quantifications help to identify high-priority areas for cost-effective investments, but do 
not provide any indication on who would finance the regional investments. Investment requirements and flows covering downstream / mitigation technology deployment only. 
Data includes investments with a direct mitigation effect, and in the case of electricity, additional transmission and distribution investments. See section 15.4.2 Quantitative 
assessment of financing needs for detailed data on investment requirements. Data on mitigation investment flows are based on a single series of reports (Climate Policy 
Initiative, CPI) which assembles data from multiple sources. Investment flows for energy efficiency are adjusted based on data from the International Energy Agency (IEA). 
Data on mitigation investments do not include technical assistance (i.e., policy and national budget support or capacity building), other non-technology deployment financing. 
Adaptation only flows are also excluded. Data on mitigation investment requirements for electricity are based on emission pathways C1, C2 and C3 (Table SPM.1). For electricity 
investment requirements, the upper end refers to the mean of C1 pathways and the lower end to the mean of C3 pathways. Data points for energy efficiency, transport and 
AFOLU cannot always be linked to C1–C3 scenarios. Data do not include needs for adaptation or general infrastructure investment or investment related to meeting the SDGs 
other than mitigation, which may be at least partially required to facilitate mitigation. The multiplication factors show the ratio of average annual model-based mitigation 
investment requirements (2020–2030) and most recent annual mitigation investments (averaged for 2017–2020). The lower and upper multiplication factors refer to the lower 
and upper ends of the range of investment needs.
Given the multiple sources and lack of harmonised methodologies, the data can only be indicative of the size and pattern of investment gaps. The gap between most recent 
flows and required investments is only a single indicator. A more comprehensive (and qualitative) assessment is required in order to understand the magnitude of the challenge 
of scaling up investment in sectors and regions. The analysis also does not consider the effects of misaligned flows. {15.3, 15.4, 15.5, Table 15.2, Table 15.3, Table 15.4}
six times with significant gaps existing across sectors and regions8 
(high confidence). The findings on still significant gaps and limited 
progress over the past few years to some extent seem to contradict 
the massive increase in commitments by financial institutions. As 
discussed in Section 15.6, the investment gap is not due to global 
scarcity of funds.
However, these investment gaps have little explanatory power 
in terms of the magnitude of the challenge to mobilise funding. 
In addition to measurement challenges from different definitions 
and data gaps, sectors and regions offer highly divergent financial 
risk-return profiles, in particular due to missing or weak regulatory 
environments consistent with ambitions levels, and economic costs 
as well as limited local capital markets, limited institutional capacity 
to ensure safeguard, standardisation, scalability and replicability of 
investment opportunities and financing models, and a pipeline ready 
for commercial investments. Moreover, soft costs and institutional 
capacity for enabling environment that can be prerequisite 
for addressing financing gaps are ignored when focusing on 
investment cost needs.
Sectoral considerations. The renewable energy sector attracted the 
highest level of financing in absolute and relative terms with business 
models in generation being proven and rapidly falling technology 
costs driving the competitiveness of solar photovoltaic and onshore 
wind, even without taking account of the mitigation component 
(FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2019; IRENA 2020a). This investment 
activity comes in line with the first generation of NDCs and their 
heavy focus on mitigation opportunities in the renewable energy 
sector (Pauw et al. 2016; Schletz et al. 2017). Still, the investment gap 
tends to remain stable with flows over the past years not showing 
an upward trend.
Comparing annual average total investments in global fuel supply 
and the power sector of approximately USD1.5 trillion9 yr–1 in 

(approximately 1.7 trillion USD 2015 yr–1) and the Sustainable 
Development Scenario (approximately 1.8 trillion USD 2015 yr–1) in 

from fossil to renewables even more than the need to increase sector 
allocations (Granoff et al. 2016; McCollum et al. 2018).
Ensuring access to the heavily regulated electricity markets is a key 
driver for an accelerated private sector engagement (IFC 2016; 
FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2018; REN21 2019), with phasing out of 
support schemes and regulatory uncertainty being a major driver for 
reduced investment volumes in various regional markets in the past 
years (FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2020). 
Strategic investors and corporate investments by utilities dominate 
the investment activity in developed countries and countries in 
transition (BNEF 2019) based on the competitiveness of renewable 

to identify high-priority areas for cost-effective investments, but do not provide any indication on who would finance the regional investments.

deflating the values to constant US Dollar 2015. In such cases, the unit is explicitly expressed as USD 2015.energy sources. Reasonable auction results based on a substantial 
private-sector competition for investments have also been achieved 
in selected developing countries driven by rather standardised 
contract structures and the increased availability of risk mitigation 
instruments addressing political and regulatory risks and home 
bias constraints (FS-UNEP Centre and BNEF 2019; IRENA 2020a). 
Development finance institution (DFI) climate portfolios tend to be 
driven by concessional loans for renewable energy generation assets 
with equity often being provided by (semi-) commercial investors 
(Section  15.3) which will have to change to accelerate renewable 
energy investment activity.
Given the wide range of estimates on current investment flows into 
energy efficiency, substantial uncertainty exists with regard to the 
magnitude of the investment gaps. While CPI publishes investment 
levels of 41 billion USD 2015 in 2019 and 24 billion USD 2015 in 2020 for 
energy efficiency, counting majorly international flows, IEA results 
come in at a much higher level of around 250 billion USD 2015 annually 
between 2017 and 2020 (IEA 2021c) and IRENA (2020c) estimates 
energy efficiency investments in buildings between 2017–2019 at an 
average of USD139 billion yr–1.
Public sector investments in the transport sector have increased 
significantly in the past years reflecting the increased interest 
of capital markets in renewable energy and the efficient and 
corresponding reallocation of public funding. Provision of funding 
by capital markets for public transport infrastructure among others 
heavily depends on suitable financing vehicles and increased funding 
for development of projects with a  low level of standardisation 
(OECD 2015a).
Both IRENA and IEA include only incremental costs of EVs in their 
estimates on needs while CPI, when measuring actual flows, includes 
those at full costs. Total private flows for EVs included in CPI numbers 
amount to USD41 billion in 2018 (Buchner et al. 2019), representing 
more than 80% of private sector finance into the transport sector, 
around one third of total public and private funding to the transport 
sector in 2018. This likely results in an underestimation of the 
financing gap – in addition to the fact that estimates for investment 
needs for rail infrastructure are only available for selected countries.
Current financing of land-based mitigation options is less than 
USD1 billion yr–1 representing only 2.5% of climate mitigation funding, 
significantly below the potential proportional contribution (Buchner 
et  al. 2019). A  stronger focus on deforestation-free value chain, 
including a  stronger reflection in taxonomies and financial sector 
investment decision processes are necessary to ensure an alignment 
of financial flows with the LTGG. Taking into account the specifics of 
land-based mitigation (in particular long investment horizons, strong 
dependency on the monetisation of mitigation effects, strong public 
sector involvement) a significant scale-up of commercial financing to 
the sector can hardly be expected in the absence of strong climate 
potential to mobilise private finance than the forest sector given its 
strong linkage to food security and hunger and shorter payback periods. 
The significant gap in land-based mitigation finance also indicates the 
crucial lack of finance to the bottom of the pyramid.
Agricultural support is an important source of distortions to 
agricultural incentives in both rich and poor countries (Mamun et al. 
2019) ranging from the largest component of the support, market 
price supports, increased gross revenue to farmers as a  result of 
higher prices due to market barriers created by government policies, 
to production payments and other support including input subsidy 
(e.g., fertiliser subsidy)  (Searchinger et al. 2020). USD600 billion of 
annual governmental support for agriculture in the OECD database 
contributes only modestly to the related objectives of boosting crop 
yields and just transition (Searchinger et al. 2020). A review of NDCs 
of 40 developing countries which submitted a NDC to the UNFCCC 
Interim NDC Registry by April 2017, and include within their NDC 
efforts to REDD+ via support from the UN-REDD Programme and/or 
World Bank Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, indicates that none 
of the countries reviewed mention fiscal policy reform of existing 
finance flows to agricultural commodity production or other publicly 
supported programmes that affect the direct and underlying drivers 
of land use conversion (Kissinger et al. 2019).
Analysis by region and type of economy. The analysis of 
gaps by type of economy illustrates the challenge for developing 
countries. Estimated mitigation financing needs as a  percentage 
of mean 2017–2020 GDP in USD 2015 comes in at around 2–4% for 
developed countries, and around 4-9% for developing countries (high 
confidence) (Figure 15.4). Climate finance flows have to increase by 
a factor of four to seven in developing countries and three to five 
in developed countries. This disparity is further exacerbated when 
considering adaptation, infrastructure and SDG-related investment 
needs (high confidence) (Hourcade et al. 2021a). However, differences 
across developing countries are significant. Flows to Eastern Asia, 
with its annual average flows (2017–2020) of 252 billion USD 2015 
being dominated by China (more than 95% of total mitigation 
flows to Eastern Asia), would have to increase by a  factor of two 
to four, a  comparable level to developed countries. Section  15.6.2 
elaborates on outlooks with regard to fiscal space and ability to tap 
capital markets, in particular for developing countries. In particular, 
attention must accelerate on low-income Africa. This large continent 
currently contributes very little to global emissions, but its rapidly 
rising energy demands and renewable energy potential versus its 
growing reliance on fossil fuels and ‘cheap’ biomass (especially 
fuelwood for cooking and charcoal, with impacts on deforestation) 
amid fast-rising urbanisation makes it imperative that institutional 
investors and policymakers recognise the very large ‘leap-frog’ 
potential for the renewable energy transition as well as risks of lock-
in effects in infrastructure more generally in Africa that is critical to 
hold the global temperatures rise to well below 2°C in the longer 
term (2020–2050). Overlooking this transition opportunity, rivalling 
China, India, USA and Europe, would be costly. Policies centred 
around the accelerated development of local capital markets for 
energy transitions  – with support from external grants, supra-
national guarantees and recognition of carbon remediation assets – are crucial options here, as in other low-income countries and 
regional settings. Notably, climate finance flows to African countries 
might have even decreased for mitigation technology deployment 
(stagnated for adaptation between 2017 and 2020), widening the 
finance gap in African countries in the recent years (high confidence).
Over 80% of climate finance is reported to originate and stay within 
borders, and even higher for private climate flows (over 90%) 
(Boissinot et  al. 2016). There are multiple reasons for such ‘home 
bias’ in finance – national policy support, differences in regulatory 
standards, exchange rate, political and governance risks, as well 
as information market failures. The extensive home bias means 
that even if national actions are announced and intended to be 
implemented unilaterally and voluntarily, the ability to implement 
them requires access to climate finance which is constrained by the 
relative ability of financial and capital markets at home to provide 
such financing, and access to global capital markets that requires 
supporting institutional policies in source countries. ‘Enabling’ public 
policies and actions locally (cities, states, countries and regions), to 
reduce investment risks and boost domestic climate capital markets 
financing, and to enlarge the pool of external climate financing 
sources with policy support from source capital countries thus matters 
at a general level. The biggest challenge in climate finance is likely to 
be in developing countries, even in the presence of enabling policies 
and quite apart from any other considerations such as equity and 
climate justice (Klinsky et al. 2017) or questions about the equitable 
allocations of future ‘climate budgets’ (Gignac and Matthews 2015). 
The differentiation between developed and developing countries 
matters most on financing. Most developed countries have already 
achieved very high levels of incomes, have the largest pool of capital 
stock and financial capital (which can be more easily redeployed 
within these countries given the home bias of financial markets), the 
most well-developed financial markets and the highest sovereign 
credit ratings, in addition to starting with very high levels of per 
capita carbon consumption – factors that should allow the fastest 
adjustment to low-carbon investments and transition in these 
countries from domestic policies alone. The financial and economic 
circumstances are more challenging in many developing countries, 
even within a heterogeneity of circumstances across countries. The 
dilemma, however, is that the fastest rates of the expected increase 
in future carbon emissions are in developing countries. The biggest 
challenge of climate finance globally is thus likely to be  the 
constraints to climate financing because of the opportunity costs 
and relative under-development of capital markets and financing 
constraints (and costs) at home in developing countries, and the 
relative availability or absence of adequate financing policy support 
internationally from developed countries. The Paris Agreement and 
commitment by developed countries to support the climate financing 
needs of developing countries thus continue to matter a great deal.
Soft costs/institutional capacity (Osama et  al. 2021). Most 
funding needs assessments focus on technology costs and ignore 
the cascade of financing needs as outlined above. International 
grant funding or national budget allocations for soft costs like 
the creation of a  regulatory environment can be a  prerequisite 
for the supply of commercial financing for the deployment of 
technologies. Such critical funding needs might represent a small 
gaps in funding of policy reforms can hinder or delay deployment 
of large volumes of funding in later years. The role, as well as the 
approximate volumes of such required timely international grant 
funding or national budget allocations, appear underestimated in 
research. The numbers available for the creation of an enabling 
environment for medium-sized renewable energy (RE) projects in 
Uganda (GET FiT Uganda 2018) are illustrative only and cannot be 
transferred as assumptions to other countries without taking into 
account potentially varying starting points in terms of institutional 
readiness, pipelines, as well as the general business environment. 
GET FiT Uganda supported 170 MWp of medium-scale RE capacity 
triggering investments of USD453 million (GET FiT Uganda 2018), 
international results-based incremental cost support amounted to 
USD92 million and project preparation, technical assistance, and 
implementation support, required USD8 million, excluding support 
from national agencies.
There is strong evidence of the correlation between institutional 
capacity of countries and international climate finance flows towards 
those economies (Adenle et al. 2017; Stender et al. 2019) and a strong 
need for robust institutional capacity to manage the transformation 
in a sustainable and human rights based way (Duyck et al. 2018). 
One example to consider unaddressed social concerns is the ongoing 
call for feedback by the European Commission and its platform on 
sustainable finance. It argues for a social taxonomy, that can support 
the identification of financing opportunities for economic activities 
contributing to social objectives (European Commission 2021b). 
SEforAll has highlighted the issue of investments not going to the 
countries with the greatest need, also partly driven by institutional 
capacity levels (SEforALL and CPI 2020). Also, most of the developing 
countries’ NDCs are conditional upon international support for 
capacity building (Pauw et al. 2020). The Climate Technology Centre 
and Network (CTCN) was created as an operational arm of the UNFCCC 
Technology Mechanism with the mandate to respond to requests from 
developing countries. Initial evaluations of the mechanism underpin 
its importance and value for developing countries but stress long 
lead times and predictability of future international public finance 
to maintain operations as key challenges (UNFCCC 2017; DANIDA 
2018). While limited pipelines, limited absorptive capacities as well 
as restricted institutional capacity of countries are often stated as 
challenges for an accelerated deployment of finance (Adenle et al. 
2017), the question remains on the role of international public climate 
finance to address this gap and whether a concrete current financing 
gap exists for patient institutional capacity building. While current 
short-term, mostly project-related, capacity building often fails to 
meet needs but alternative, well-structured patient interventions and 
finance could play an important role (Saldanha 2006; Hope 2011) 
accepting other barriers than financing playing a role as well. One 
reason why international public climate finance is not sufficiently 
directed to such needs might be the complexity in measuring 
intangible, direct outcomes like improved institutional capacity (Clark 
et al. 2018).

and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF), the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) are focused 
on supporting the preparatory process of the NAPs. But the Adaptation Fund will support the implementation of concrete projects up to USD10 million per country.Early stage/venture capital financing/pilot project financing. 
Early-stage companies in impact investment sectors with business 
solutions can contribute positively to climate impact. Figure SPM.8 
highlights the need for new business models facilitating parts of the 
behavioural change. Also, SE4All has underpinned the need for an 
expansion of available business models to achieve universal access 
(SEforALL and CPI 2020). Further research and development needs range 
from resource efficiency of proven technologies and next generation 
technologies but also new technologies (Chapter 16). Access to early 
stage financing remains critical with performance in recent years being 
weak (Gaddy et al. 2016). This historically weak performance of clean 
tech start-ups burdens the interest of investors in the sector on the 
one hand and discourages experienced executive talent (Wang and 
Yee 2020). Besides that, the concentration of venture capital markets 
in the USA, Europe and India represents a major challenge (FS-UNEP 
Centre and BNEF 2019; Statistica 2021). With regard to commercial-
scale demonstration projects, IEA estimates a need of USD90 billion of 
public sector finance before 2030 having around USD25 billion already 
planned by governments to 2030 (IEA 2021c).
Need for parallel rather than sequential investment decisions. 
The needs and gaps assessment does not include upstream 
investment needs required to facilitate the technology deployment 
as foreseen in the scenarios presented above. For example, for their 
transforming energy scenario IRENA estimates the number of EVs 
to increase from around 8 million units in 2019 to 269 million units 
in 2030 (IRENA 2020c). This would require investments in battery 
factories amounting to approximately USD207 billion with further 
investment requirements in the value chain (IRENA 2020d). This 
illustrates the extent of parallel investments based on goals rather 
than concrete regulatory interventions and/or demand and poses 
a problem of upfront investment risks for each industry in the chain 
in the absence of certainty of the presence of parallel decisions in the 
upstream and downstream links in the chain. This is a typical element 
of the ‘valley of the death’ of innovation (Scherer et al. 2000; Åhman 
et al. 2017). It discourages risk-taking and slows down the learning-
by-doing processes, economies of scale and increasing returns to 
adoption needed for lowering the costs of systemic technical change 
(Kahouli-Brahmi 2009; Weiss et  al. 2010). Implications for risk 
perception, financing costs as well as investment decision-making 
processes and ultimately for feasibility are rarely considered.
Finance for adaptation and resilience. As explained early, the 
reduction of the infrastructure gap to increase societies’ resilience 
and the implementation of the NAPs will require more and higher 
levels of sustained financing. Activities mobilised for adaptation and 
resilience are often not marketable and their financing will continue 
coming from the public sector (Murphy and Parry 2020) and, at the 
international level, from grants-based technical assistance or through 
budgetary support or basket finance for large projects/programmes 
or sector-wide approaches or multilateral finance under (Non-)
UNFCCC10 that also anticipate supporting NAP implementation  – 
particularly those involving incremental costs and co-benefits, 
infrastructures, and food production. According to the UNFCCC, ‘in 
2015–2016, 3% of international public adaptation finance flows 
was supplied by multilateral climate funds, while 84% came from 
development finance institutions and 13% from other government 
sources’ (UNFCCC 2019c). Comprehensive reporting on adaptation 
finance by Murphy and Parry (2020) and Buchner et al. (2019) argues 
that flows of finance for adaptation action in developing countries 
in 2017 and 2018 were estimated to be approximately USD30 
billion; this plus an additional estimated flow of USD12 billion for 
dual adaptation and mitigation actions totalled USD42 billion, 
accounting for 7.25% of the total estimated international public and 
private flows of climate finance (Buchner et al. 2019). They are far 
below the financing needs given in Section 15.4. To date, the private 
sector has limited involvement in NAPs and adaptation projects and 
planning but can be involved through public-private partnership 
(Section  15.6.2.1) and other incentives provided by governments 
(Schmidt-Traub and Sachs 2015; Druce et al. 2016; Koh et al. 2016; 
UNEP 2016; NAP Global Network 2017; Murphy and Parry 2020) 
and innovative private financing mechanisms such as green and 
blue bonds. However, adaptation financing is only about 2% of the 
share of green bond financing raised up to June 2019 (UNFCCC 
2019c),11 whereas it is about 10% of sovereign green bonds raised 
(UNFCCC 2019d). (Tuhkanen 2020), in a  detailed review of green 
bond issuance in the Environmental Finance Data base 2019, found 
that between March 2010 to April 2019, ‘5% of all green bonds 
issued were categorised as adaptation and that ‘the private sector 
accounts for a  significant proportion of adaptation-related green 
bond issuances’ (Tuhkanen 2020). However, GIZ (2017b), Nicol et al. 
(2017, 2018a), and Tuhkanen (2020) highlight that there is scepticism 
about this stream of finance for adaptation due to the factors that 
have thus far limited the private sector’s involvement in adaptation: 
lack of resilience-related revenue streams, the small scale of some 
adaptation projects and the overall ‘intangibility’ of financing 
adaptation projects (Larsen et al. 2019).
Financing for resilience is limited, unpredictable, fragmented and 
focused on few projects or sectors and short term as opposed to 
programmatic and long term (10–15 years) finacing to build resilience 
(ISDR 2009, 2011; Kellett and Peters 2014; Watson et al. 2015). Market-
based mechanisms are available but not equally accessible to all 
developing countries, particularly SIDS and LDCs, and such mechanisms 
can undermine debt sustainability (OECD and World Bank 2016). While 
resilience financing is mainly grant funding, concessional loans are 
increasing substantially and are key sources of financing for disaster 
and resilience, particularly for upper-middle-income countries (OECD 
and World Bank 2016). The combination of these trends can contribute 
to greater levels of indebtedness among many developing countries, 
many of which are already at or approaching debt distress.
Social protection systems can be linked with a  number of the 
instruments already considered: reserve funds, insurance and 
catastrophe bonds, regional risk-sharing facilities, contingent credit, 
in addition to traditional international aid and disaster response. 
Hallegatte et  al. (2017) recommend combining adaptive social 

which includes financial instruments to deliver adequate liquidity 
and contingency plans for the disbursement of funds post disaster. 
Challenges related to financing residual climate-related losses and 
damages are particularly high for developing countries. Financing 
losses and damages from extreme events requires rapid pay-outs; the 
cost of financing for many developing countries is already quite high; 
and the expense of risk financing is expected to increase as disasters 
become more frequent, intense and more costly, not only due to 
climate change but also due to higher levels of exposure. Addressing 
both extreme and slow onset climate impacts requires designing 
adequate financial protection systems for reaching the most 
vulnerable. Moreover, some fraction of losses and damages, both 
material and non-material, are not commonly valued in monetary 
terms (non-economic loss) and hence financing requirements are 
hard to estimate. These non-market-based residual impacts include 
loss of cultural identity, sacred places, human health and lives (Ameli 
et al. 2021a; Paul 2019; Serdeczny 2019).
15.6 Approaches to Accelerate Alignment 
of Financial Flows with Long-term 
Global Goals
Near-term actions to shift the financial system over the next decade 
are critically important and possible with globally coordinated 
efforts. Taking into account the inertia of the financial system as 
well as the magnitude of the challenge to align financial flows with 
the long-term global goals, fast action is required to ensure the 
readiness of the financial sector as an enabler of the transition (high 
confidence). The following subsections elaborate on key areas which 
can have a catalytic effect in terms of addressing existing barriers – 
besides political leadership and interventions discussed in other 
Chapters of AR6.
Addressing knowledge gaps with regard to climate risk analysis and 
transparency will be one key driver for more appropriate climate 
risk assessment and efficient capital allocation (Section  15.6.1), 
efficient enabling environments to support the reduction of financing 
costs and reduce dependency on public financing (Section 15.6.2), 
a  revised common understanding of debt sustainability, including 
that negative implications of deferred climate investments on future 
GDP , particularly stranded assets and resources to be compensated, 
can facilitate the stronger access to public climate finance, 
domestically and internationally (Section 15.6.3), climate risk pooling 
and insurance approaches are a key element of financing of a just 
transition (Section 15.6.4), the supply of finance to a widened focus 
on relevant actors can ensure transformational climate action at all 
levels (Section 15.6.5), new green asset classes and financial products 
can attract the attention of capital markets and support the scale 
up of financing by providing standardised investment opportunities 
which can be well integrated in existing investment processes 
(Section 15.6.6), a stronger focus on the development of local capital 
markets can help mobilise new investor groups and to some extent 
mitigate home bias effects (Section  15.6.7), new business models 
and financing approaches can help to overcome barriers related 
to transactions costs by aggregating and/or transferring financing 
needs and establishing a supply of finance for needs of stakeholder 
groups lacking financial inclusion (Section 15.6.8).
15.6.1 Addressing Knowledge Gaps with Regard 
to Climate Risk Analysis and Transparency
Climate change as a source of financial risk.
Achieving climate mitigation and adaptation objectives requires 
ambitious climate finance flows in the near-term, that is, 5–10 years 
ahead. However, knowledge gaps in the assessment of climate-
related financial risk are a  key barrier to such climate finance 
flows. Therefore, this section discusses the main knowledge gaps 
that are currently being addressed in the literature and those that 
remain outstanding.
Climate-related financial risk is meant here as the potential adverse 
impact of climate change on the value of financial assets. A recent 
but remarkable development since AR5 is that climate change has 
been explicitly recognised by financial supervisors as a  source of 
financial risk that matters both for financial institutions and citizens’ 
savings (Bolton et al. 2020). Previously, climate change was mostly regarded in the finance community only as an ethical issue. The 
reasons why climate change implies financial risk are not new and 
are discussed more in detail below. What is new is that climate 
enters now as a factor in the assessment of financial institutions’ risk 
(e.g., the European Central Bank or the European Banking Authority) 
and credit rating (Section  15.6.3), and, going forward, into stress-
test exercises. This implies changes in incentives of the supervised 
financial actors, both public and private, and thus changes in the 
landscape of mitigation action by generating a  new potential for 
climate finance flows. However, critical knowledge gaps remain. 
In particular, the underestimation of climate-related financial risk 
by public and private financial actors can explain that the current 
allocation of capital among financial institutions is often inconsistent 
with the mitigation objectives (Rempel et al. 2020). Moreover, even 
a  correct assessment of risk, which could provide incentives for 
divesting from carbon-intensive activities, does not necessarily lead 
to investing in the technical options needed for deep decarbonisation. 
Therefore, understanding the dynamics of the low-carbon transition 
require to fill in at the same time gaps about risk and gaps about 
investments in enabling activities in a broader sense.
Physical risk. On the one hand, unmitigated climate change implies 
an increased potential for adverse socio-economic impacts especially 
in more exposed economic activities and areas (high confidence). 
Accordingly, physical risk refers to the component of financial risk F
More key areas
with catalitic
effects to
address
barriersFinance as: Enabler and Follower
Resulting effect
of increased
competitiveness
of green risk-
return proﬁles
Synergies
between
real econ./
ﬁn. sect.
regulation
Creating Momentum for  
E
E
F
E
Appropriate
consideration of
physical and
transition risk
Pricing of
carbon
externalities/
regulative
law
15.6.1
15.6.215.6.4 15.6.3
15.6.515.6.7
15.6.8
15.6.6
Intl. Public
climate
ﬁnance15.6.515.6.1 Section:Consistent ﬁnancial ﬂows Inconsistent ﬁnancial ﬂows Net ﬂows 
<2º
>3º
Figure 15.5 | Visual abstract to address financing gaps in Section 15.6.
climate change (e.g., extreme weather events or sea level rise) on the 
financial value of assets such as industrial plants or real estate. In turn, 
these losses can translate into losses on the values of financial assets 
issued by exposed companies (e.g., equity/bonds) and or sovereign 
entities as well as losses for insurance companies. The assessment 
of climate financial physical risks poses challenges in terms of data, 
methods and scenarios. It requires cross-match scenarios of climate-
related hazards at granular geographical scale, with the geolocation 
and financial value of physical assets. The relationship between 
the value of physical assets (such as plants or real estate) and the 
financial value of securities issued by the owners of those assets 
is not straightforward. Further, the repercussion of climate-related 
hazards on sovereign risk should also be accounted for.
Transition risks and opportunities. On the other hand, the 
mitigation of climate change, by means of a  transition to a  low-
carbon economy, requires a  transformation of the energy and 
production system at a pace and scale that implies adverse impacts 
on a range of economic activities, but also opportunities for some 
other activities (high confidence). If these impacts are factored in by 
financial markets, they are reflected in the value of financial assets. 
Thus, transition risks and opportunities refers to the component of 
financial risk (opportunities) associated with negative (positive) 
adjustments in assets’ values resulting directly or indirectly from the 
low-carbon transition.
The concepts of carbon stranded assets (see e.g., Leaton and Sussams 
2011), and orderly vs disorderly transition (Sussams et al. 2015) which 
emerged in the NGO community, have provided powerful metaphors 
to conceptualise transition risks and have evolved into concepts 
used also by financial supervisors (NGFS 2019)and academics. The 
term carbon stranded assets refers to fossil fuel-related assets (fuel 
or equipment) that become unproductive. An orderly transition 
is defined here as a situation in which market players are able to 
fully anticipate the price adjustments that could arise from the 
transition. In this case, there would still be losses associated with 
stranded assets, but it would be possible for market players to spread 
losses over time and plan ahead. In contrast, a  disorderly transition 
is defined here as a situation in which a transition to a low-carbon 
economy on a  2°C path is achieved (i.e.,  by about 2040), but the 
impact of climate policies in terms of reallocation of capital into 
low-carbon activities and the corresponding adjustment in prices of 
financial assets (e.g., bonds and equity shares) is large, sudden and 
not fully anticipated by market players and investors. Note the impact 
could be unanticipated even if the date of the introduction is known 
in advance by the market players. There are several reasons why such 
adjustments could occur. One simple argument is that the political 
economy of the transition is characterised by forces pulling in 
different directions, including opposing interests within the industry, 
and mounting pressure from social awareness of unmitigated climate 
risks. Politics will have to find a  synthesis and the outcome could 

changes in perception and incentives among the market players and hence of the dynamics of climate finance flows.

deflating the values to constant USD 2015. In such cases, the unit is explicitly expressed as USD 2015.remain uncertain until it suddenly unravels. Note also that, in order 
to be relevant for financial risk, the disorderly transition does not 
need to be a catastrophic scenario in terms of the fabric of markets. It 
also does not automatically entail systemic risk, as discussed below. 
Knowledge gaps in this area are related to emerging questions, 
including: What are, in detail, the transmission channels of physical 
and transition risk? How to assess the magnitude of the exposure 
to these risks for financial institutions and ultimately for people’s 
savings? How do transition risk and opportunities depend on the 
future scenarios of climate change and climate policies? How to deal 
with the intrinsic uncertainty around the scenarios? To what extent 
could an underestimation of climate-related financial risk feed back 
on the alignment of climate finance flows and hamper the low-
carbon transition? Should climate risk be explicitly accounted for in 
regulatory frameworks for financial institutions, such as Basel III for 
banks and national frameworks for insurance? What lessons from 
the 2008 financial crisis are relevant here, regarding moral hazard 
and the trustworthiness of credit risk ratings? The attention of both 
practitioners and the scientific community to these questions has 
grown since the Paris Agreement. In the following we review some 
of the findings from the literature, but the field is relatively young 
and many of the questions are still open.12 Damages from climate 
change are expected to escalate dramatically in Europe (Forzieri 
et al. 2018) and in some EU countries there is already some evidence 
that banks, anticipating possible losses on the their loan books, lend 
proportionally less as a consequence.
Assessment of physical risk. There is a literature on estimates of 
economic losses on physical assets (see Cross-Working Group Box 
ECONOMIC in chapter 16 of AR6 WGII). Here we discuss some figures 
and mechanisms that are relevant for the financial system. Significant 
cost increases have been observed related to increases in frequency 
and magnitude of extreme events (high confidence) (Section 15.4.2). 
At the global level, the expected ‘climate value at risk’ (climate 
VaR) of financial assets has been estimated to be 1.8% along 
a business-as-usual emissions path (Dietz et al. 2016), with however, 
a concentration of risk in the tail (e.g., 99th VaR equals to 16.9%, or 
USD24.213 trillion, in 2016). Climate-related impacts are estimated 
to increase the frequency of banking crises (up over 200% across 
scenarios) while rescuing insolvent banks could increase the ratio of 
public debt to gross domestic product by a factor of two (Lamperti 
et al. 2019). Further assessments of physical risk for financial assets 
(Mandel 2020), accounting in particular for the propagation of losses 
through financial networks, estimate global yearly GDP losses at 
7.1% (1.13%) in 2080, without adaptation (with adaptation), the 
former corresponding to a 10-fold increase with respect to the current 
yearly losses (0.76% of global GDP). Finally, climate physical risk can 
impact on the value of sovereign bonds (one of the top asset classes 
by size), in particular for vulnerable countries (Volz et al. 2020).
Insurance pay-outs for catastrophes have increased significantly over 
the last 10 years, with dramatic cost spikes in years with multiple 
and Maria). This trend is expected to continue. The indirect costs of 
a climate-related flooding event can be up to 50% of the total costs, 
the majority of which is not covered by insurance (Alnes et al. 2018) 
(Section15.6.4). The gap between total damage losses and insurance 
pay-outs has increased over the past 10 years (Swiss Re Institute 
2019). Indeed, the probability of ‘extreme but plausible’ scenarios 
will be progressively revised upwards in the ‘value at risk’. As a result 
it becomes more difficult to find financial actors willing to provide 
insurance, as was observed for real estate in relation to flood and 
wildfires in California (Ouazad and Kahn 2019). This progressive 
adjustment would keep the financial system safe (Climate-Related 
Market Risk Subcommittee 2020; Keenan and Bradt 2020), but 
transfer to taxpayers the onus of damage compensation and the 
financing of adaptation investments (OECD 2021c) as well as build 
up latent liabilities.
Assessment of transition risk. Carbon stranded assets. Fossil 
fuel reserve and resource estimates exceed in equivalent quantity 
of CO 2 with virtual certainty the carbon budget available to reach 
the 1.5°C and 2°C targets (high confidence)  (Meinshausen et al. 
2009; McGlade and Ekins 2015; Millar et  al. 2017). In relative 
terms, stranded assets of fossil fuel companies amount to 82% 
of global coal reserves, 49%  of global gas reserves and 33% of 
global oil reserves (McGlade and Ekins 2015). This suggests that 
only less than the whole quantity of fossil fuels currently valued 
(either currently extracted, waiting for extraction as reserves or 
assets on company balance sheets) can yield economic return if 
the carbon budget is respected. The devaluation of fossil fuel assets 
implies financial losses for both the public sector (Section 15.6.8) 
and the private sector (Coffin and Grant 2019). Global estimates 
of potential stranded fossil fuel assets amount to at least 1 trillion, 
based on ongoing low-carbon technology trends and in the 
absence of climate policies (cumulated to 2035 with 10% discount 
rate applied; USD8  trillion without discounting (Mercure et  al. 
2018a)). With worldwide climate policies to achieve the 2°C target 
with 75% likelihood, this could increase to over USD4 trillion (until 
2035, 10% discount rate; USD12 trillion without discounting). 
Other estimates indicate USD8–15 trillion (until 2050, 5% discount 
rate, (Bauer et al. 2015)) and USD185 trillion (cumulated to year 

Cogswell 2016)). However the geographical distribution of potential 
stranded fossil fuel assets (also called ‘unburnable carbon’) is 
not even across the world due to differences in production costs 
(McGlade and Ekins 2015). In this context, a delayed deployment of 
climate finance and consequently limited alignment of investment 
activity with the Paris Agreement tend to strengthen carbon and 
thus to increase the magnitude of stranded assets.
Assets directly and indirectly exposed to transition risk. 
In terms of types of assets and economic activities, the focus 
of estimates of carbon stranded assets tends to be on physical 
reserves of fossil fuel (e.g.,  oil fields) and sometimes financial 
assets of fossil fuel companies (van der Ploeg and Rezai 2020). 
However, a precondition for a broader analysis of transition risks and 
opportunities is to go beyond the narrative of stranded assets and 
to consider a classification of sectors of all the economic activities that could be affected (Monasterolo 2020). This, in turn depends 
on their direct or indirect role in the GHG value chain, their level of 
substitutability with respect to fossil fuel and their role in the policy 
landscape. Moreover, such a classification needs to be replicable and 
comparable across portfolios and jurisdictions. One classification that 
meets these criteria is the Climate Policy Relevant Sectors (CPRS) 
(Battiston et  al. 2017) which has been used in several studies by 
financial supervisors (EIOPA 2018; ECB 2019; EBA 2020; ESMA 2020). 
The CPRS classification builds on the international classification of 
economic activities (ISIC) to map the most granular level (4 digits) 
into a  small set of categories characterised by differing types of 
risk: fossil fuel (i.e., all activities whose revenues depend mostly and 
directly on fossil fuel, including concession of reserves and operating 
industrial plants for extraction and refinement); electricity (affected in 
terms of input but that can in principle diversify their energy sources); 
energy intensive (e.g., steel or cement production plants, automotive 
manufacturing plants), which are affected in terms of energy cost 
but not in terms of the main input); and transport and buildings 
(affected in terms of both energy sources and specific policies). All 
financial assets (e.g., bonds, equity shares, loans) having as issuers 
or counterparties firms whose revenues depend significantly on the 
above activities are thus potentially exposed to transition risks and 
opportunities. Further, investors’ portfolios have to be part of the 
analysis since changes in financial assets values affect the stability 
of financial institutions and can thus feed back into the transition 
dynamics itself (e.g., through cost of debt for firms and through costs 
for assisting the financial sector). One outstanding challenge for the 
analysis of investors’ exposure to climate risks is the difficulty of 
gathering granular and standardised information on the breakdown 
of non-financial firms’ revenues and CAPEX in terms of low-/high-
carbon activities (high confidence).
Several financial supervisors have conducted assessments of 
transition risk for the financial system at the regional level. For 
instance, the European Central Bank (ECB) reported preliminary 
estimates of aggregate exposures of financial institutions to CPRS 
relative to their total debt securities holdings as ranging between 
1% for banks to about 9% for investment funds (ECB 2019). The 
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) 
reported aggregate exposures to CPRS of EU insurance companies 
at about 13% of their total securities holdings (EIOPA 2018). 
Further analyses on the EU securities holdings indicate that among 
financial investments in bonds issued by non-financial corporations, 
EU institutions hold exposures to CPRS ranging between 36.8% for 
investment funds to 47.7% for insurance corporations; analogous 
figures for equity holdings range from 36.4% for banks to 43.1% for 
pension funds (Alessi et al. 2019). Another study indicates that losses 
on EU insurance portfolios of sovereign bonds could reach up to 1%, 
in conservative scenarios (Battiston et al. 2019).
Given the magnitude of the assets that are potentially exposed, 
reported in the previously cited studies, a delayed or uncoordinated 
transition risk can have implications for financial stability not only 
at the level of individual financial institutions, but also at the macro 
level. The possible systemic nature of climate financial risk has been 
highlighted on the basis of general equilibrium economic analysis 
(Stern and Stiglitz 2021).
a major source of systemic risk, particularly for banks with portfolios 
concentrated in certain economic sectors or geographical areas 
(de Guindos 2021). Specifically, the concern that central banks would 
have to act as ‘climate rescuers of last resort’ in a systemic financial 
crisis stemming from some combination of physical and transition 
risk has been raised in the financial supervisor community (Bolton 
et al. 2020). The systemic nature of climate risk is reinforced by the 
possible presence of moral hazard. Indeed, if a  sufficient number 
of financial actors have an incentive to downplay climate-related 
financial risk, then systemic risk builds up in the financial system, 
eventually materialising for taxpayers (Climate-Related Market Risk 
Subcommittee 2020). While such type of risk may go undetected to 
standard market indicators for a while, it can materialise with a time 
delay, similarly to the developments observed in the run up to the 

These considerations are part of an ongoing discussion on whether 
the current financial frameworks, including Basel III, should 
incorporate explicitly climate risk as a  systemic risk. In particular, 
the challenges in quantifying the extent of climate risk, reviewed in 
this section, especially if risk is systemic, raise the question whether 
a combination of quantitative and qualitative restrictions on banks’ 
portfolios could be put in place to limit the build-up of climate risks 
(Baranović et al. 2021).
Endogeneity of risk and multiplicity of scenarios. One 
fundamental challenge is that climate-related financial risk is 
endogenous (high confidence). This means that the perception of 
the risk changes the risk itself, unlike most contexts of financial 
risk. Indeed, transition risk depends on whether governments and 
firms continue on a business-as-usual pathway (i.e., misaligned with 
the Paris Agreement targets) or engage on a  climate mitigation 
pathway. But the realisation of the transition pathway depends 
itself on how, collectively, society, including financial investors and 
supervisors, perceive the risk of taking or not taking the transition 
scenario. The circularity between perception of risk and realisation 
of the scenario implies that multiple scenarios are possible, and that 
which scenario is ultimately realised can depend on policy action. The 
coordination problem associated also with low-carbon investments 
opportunities increases the uncertainty. Further, not all low-carbon 
activities are directly functional to the transition (e.g., investments in 
pharmaceutical, IT companies, or financial intermediaries), thus not 
all reallocations of capital lead to the same path.
In this context, probabilities of occurrence of scenarios are difficult 
to assess and this is important because risks vary widely across 
the different scenarios. In this context a major challenge is the fat-
tail nature of physical risk. One the one hand, forecasts of climate 
change and its impact on humans and ecosystems imply tail events 
(Weitzman 2014) and tipping points which cannot be overcome by 
model consensus (Knutti 2010). On the other hand, everything else 
the same, costs and benefits vary substantially with assumptions on 
agents’ utility, productivity, and intertemporal discount rate, which 
ultimately depend on philosophical and ethical considerations 
(Nordhaus 2007; Stern 2008; Pindyck 2013). Thus, more knowledge 
is needed on the interaction of climate physical and transition risks, the possible reinforcing feedbacks and transmission channels to 
the economy and to finance. Moreover, models need to account 
for compound risk, that is, the interaction of climate physical and/
or transition risk with other sources of risk such as pandemics, 
such as COVID-19.
Challenges for climate transition scenarios. The endogeneity of 
risk and its associated deep uncertainty implies that the standard 
approach to financial risk, consisting of computing expected 
values and risk based on historical values of market prices, is not 
adequate for climate risk (high confidence) (Bolton et  al. 2020). 
To address this challenge, a  recent stream of work has developed 
an approach to make use of climate policy scenarios to derive risk 
measures (e.g., expected shortfall) for financial assets and portfolios, 
conditioned to scenarios of disorderly transition (Battiston et al. 2017; 
Monasterolo and Battiston 2020; Roncoroni et al. 2020). In particular, 
climate policy shocks on the output of low-/high-carbon economic 
activities are calculated based on trajectories of energy technologies 
as provided by large-scale Integrated Assessment Models (Kriegler 
et al. 2015; McCollum et al. 2018) conditioned to the introduction of 
specific climate policies over time. This approach allows to conduct 
climate stress-tests both at the level of financial institutions and at 
the level of the financial system of a given jurisdiction.
In a  similar spirit, recently, the community of financial supervisors 
in collaboration with the community of climate economics has 
identified a set of climate policy scenarios, based on large-scale IAM, 
as candidate scenarios for assessing transition risk (Monasterolo 
and Battiston 2020). These scenarios have been used, for instance, 
in an assessment of transition risk conducted at a national central 
bank (Allen et al. 2020). This development is key to mainstreaming 
the assessment of transition risk among financial institutions, but the 
following challenges emerge (high confidence). First, a  consensus 
among financial supervisors and actors on scenarios of transition 
risk that are too mild could lead to a  systematic underestimation 
of risk. The reason is that the default probability of leveraged 
financial institutions is sensitive to errors in the estimation of the 
loss distribution and hence sensitive on the choice of transition 
scenarios (Battiston and Monasterolo 2020). This in turn could 
lead to an allocation of capital across low-/high-carbon activities 
that is insufficient to cater for the investment needs of the low-
carbon transition.
Second, IAM do not contain a description of the financial system in 
terms of actors and instruments and make assumptions on agents’ 
expectations that could be inconsistent with the nature of a disorderly 
transition (Espagne 2018; Pollitt and Mercure 2018a; Battiston 
et al. 2020b). In particular, IAMs solve for least cost pathways to an 
emissions target in 2100 (AR4 WGIII SPM Box 3), while the financial 
sector’s time horizon is much shorter and risk is an important factor 
in investment decisions.
Third, the current modelling frameworks used to develop climate 
mitigation scenarios, which are based on large-scale IAM, assume that 
the financial system acts always as an enabler and do not account for 
the fact that, under some condition (i.e., if there is underestimation 
of climate transition risk) can also act as a barrier to the transition 
high-carbon activities.
Macroeconomic implications of the technological transition. 
Global macroeconomic changes that may affect asset prices are 
expected to take place as a result of a possible reduction in growth 
or contraction of fossil fuel demand, in scenarios in which climate 
targets are met according to carbon budgets, but also following 
ongoing energy efficiency changes (high confidence) (Clarke et  al. 
2014; Mercure et al. 2018a). A review of the economic mechanisms 
involved in the accumulation of systemic risk associated with 
declining industries, with focus on fossil fuels, is given by Semieniuk 
et al. (2021). An example is the transport sector, which uses around 
50% of oil extracted (IEA 2018; Thomä 2018). A rapid diffusion of 
EV (and other alternative vehicle types) poses an important risk as 
it could lead to oil demand peaking far before mid-century (Mercure 
et al. 2018b; 2021). New technologies and fuel switching in aviation, 
heavy industry and shipping could further displace liquid fossil fuel 
demand (IEA 2017). A  rapid diffusion of solar photovoltaic could 
displace electricity generation based predominantly on coal and 
gas (Sussams and Leaton 2017). A  rapid diffusion of household 
and  commercial indoor heating and cooling based on electricity 
could further reduce the demand for oil, coal and gas (Knobloch et al. 
2019). Parallels can be made with earlier literature on great waves of 
innovation, eras of clustered technological innovation and diffusion 
between which periods of economic, financial and social instability 
have emerged (Freeman and Louca 2001; Perez 2009).
Due to the predominantly international nature of fossil fuel markets, 
assets may be at risk from regulatory and technological changes both 
domestically and in foreign countries (medium confidence). Fossil fuel 
exporting nations with lower competitiveness could lose substantial 
amounts of industrial activity and employment in scenarios of peaking 
or declining demand for fossil fuels. In scenarios of peaking oil demand, 
production is likely to concentrate towards the Middle East and OPEC 
countries (IEA 2017). Since state-owned fossil fuel companies tend to 
enjoy lower production costs, privately-owned fossil fuel companies 
are more at risk (Thomä 2018). Losses of employment may be directly 
linked to losses of fossil fuel-related industrial activity or indirectly 
linked through losses of large institutions, notably of government 
income from extraction royalties and export duties. A  multiplier 
effect may take place making losses of employment spill out of fossil 
fuel extraction, transformation and transportation sectors into other 
supplying sectors (Mercure et al. 2018a).
Main regulatory developments and voluntary responses to 
climate risk. Framing climate risk as a  financial risk (not just as 
an ethical issue) is key for it to become an actionable criterion for 
investment decision among mainstream investors (high confidence) 
(TCFD 2019). Since 2015 financial supervisors and central banks 
(e.g.,  the Financial Stability Board, the G20 Green Finance Study 
Group, and the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS)) 
have played a  central role in raising awareness and increasing 
transparency of the potential material financial impacts of climate 
change within the financial sector (Bank of England 2015, 2018; 
TCFD 2019). The NGFS initiative has engaged, in particular, in the 
elaboration of climate financial risk scenarios.Although disclosure has increased since the TCFD recommendations 
were published, the information is still insufficient for investors 
and more clarity is needed on potential financial impacts and 
how resilient corporate strategies are under different scenarios 
(TCFD 2019). Several efforts to provide guidance and tools for the 
application of the TCFD recommendations have been made (using 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) Standards and the 
Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB) Framework to Enhance 
Climate-Related Financial Disclosures in Mainstream Reporting TCFD 
Implementation Guide (UNEP FI 2018; CDSB and SASB 2019). Results 
of voluntary reporting have been mixed, with one study pointing 
to unreliable and incomparable results reported by the US utilities 
sector to the CDP (Stanny 2018).
There have been also similar initiatives at the national level (DNB 
2017; UK Government 2017; US GCRP 2018b). In particular, France 
was the first country to mandate climate risk disclosure from financial 
institutions (via Article 173 of the law on energy transition). However, 
disclosure responses have been so far mixed in scope and detail, with 
the majority of insurance companies not reporting on physical risk 
(Evain et al. 2018). In the UK, mandatory GHG emissions reporting for 
UK-listed companies has not led to substantial emissions reductions 
to date but could be laying the foundation for future mitigation (Tang 
and Demeritt 2018).
A key recent development is the EU Taxonomy for Sustainable Finance 
(TEG 2019), which provides a classification of economic activities that 
(among other dimensions) contribute to climate mitigation or can be 
enabling for the low-carbon transition. Indirectly, such classification 
provides useful information on investors’ exposure to transition risk 
(Alessi et  al. 2019; ESMA 2020). Finally, many consultancies have 
stepped forward offering services related to climate risk. However, 
the methods are typically proprietary, non-transparent, or based 
primarily on carbon footprinting, which is a necessary but insufficient 
measure of climate risk. Further, ESG (environmental, social and 
governance) metrics can be useful but are, alone, inadequate to 
assess climate risk.
Illustrative mitigation pathways and financial risk for end-users 
of climate scenarios
Decision-makers in financial risk management make increasing use 
of climate policy scenarios, in line with the TCFD guidelines and 
the recommendations of the NGFS. In order to reduce the number 
of scenarios to consider, Illustrative Mitigation Pathways (IMPs, 
Chapter  3), have been elaborated to illustrate key features that 
characterise the possible climate (policy) futures. The following 
considerations can be useful for scenario end-users who carry out 
risk analyses on the basis of the scenarios described in Chapter 3. It is 
possible to associate climate policy scenarios with levels of physical 
and/or transition risk, but these are not provided with the scenario 
data themselves.
On the one hand, each scenario is associated with a warming path, 
which in turn, on the basis of the results from WGII, implies certain 
levels of physical risk (AR6 WGII Chapter 16). However, climate impacts 
are not accounted for in the scenarios. Moreover, levels of risk may vary 
of adaptation. On the other hand, while mitigation can come with 
transition risk, in the case of lack of coordination among the actors, 
as discussed earlier in this section, this is not modelled explicitly in the 
trajectories, since the financial sector is not represented in underlying 
models. The scientific state of the art in climate-related financial risk 
offers an analysis that is not yet comprehensive of both the physical 
and transition risk dimensions in the same quantitative framework. 
However, decision-makers can follow a  mixed approach where they 
can combine quantitative risk assessment for transition risk with more 
qualitative risk analysis related to physical risk.
Figure 15.6 represents sequences of events following along a scenario 
both in terms of physical risk (left) and transition risk (right). Four 
groups of IMPs (more are considered based on the warming level 
they lead to in 2100. Current Policies (CurPol) considers climate 
policies implemented in 2020 with only a  gradual strengthening 
afterwards, leading to above 4°C warming (with respect to pre-
industrial levels). Moderate Action (ModAct) explores the impact of 
implementing the NDCs (pledged mitigation targets) as formulated 
in 2020 and some further strengthening afterwards, thereby limiting 
warming to less than 4°C (>50%), but above 3°C (>50%). In these 
two scenarios, there is no stabilisation of temperature, meaning 
that further warming occurs after 2100 (and higher risk) even if 
stabilisation could be eventually achieved. They are referred to as pathways with higher emissions. The warming levels reached along 
these two scenarios imply physical risk levels that are ‘Moderate’ until 

Noting, that ‘Moderate’ physical risk can mean for some countries 
(i.e.,  SIDS) significant and even hardly absorbable consequences 
(i.e., reaching hard adaptation limits). Transition risk is not relevant 
for these scenarios, since a transition is not pursued.
Illustrative Mitigation Pathways include two groups of scenarios 
consistent with modelled global pathways that limit warming to 2°C 
(>67%) or lower, respectively. The two groups are representative 
for the IMPs defined in Chapter  3. In these scenarios, warming is 
stabilised before 2100. The warming levels along these paths imply 
‘Moderate’ physical risk until 2050 and ‘High’ risk in 2050–2100 
(with low levels of adaptation). Transition risk can arise along these 
trajectories from changes in expectations of economic actors about 
which of the scenarios is about to materialise. These changes imply, in 
turn, possible large variations in the financial valuation of securities 
and contracts, with losses on the portfolio of institutional investors 
and households. High policy credibility is key to avoiding transition 
risk, by making expectations consistent early on with the scenario. 
Low credibility can delay the adjustment of expectations by several 
years, leading either to a  late and sudden adjustment. However, 
if the policy never becomes credible, this changes the scenario since 
the initial target is not met.
Physical
riskImplementation
progressCurrent
policy ambitionPolicy
credibilityTransition
risk
2050–2100 2020–2050
Very high
High
ModerateLow
Very high
High
ModerateModerate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
ModerateModerate
Low
High
Low
HighLow
High
Low
HighLow
High
HighLow
LowIP CurPol
(Above 4˚C)
IP ModAct
(Above 3˚C)
IMP
<2˚C
IMP
1.5˚C2020–2050
Figure 15.6 | Schematic representation of climate scenarios in terms of both physical and transition risk.  While the figure does not cover all possible events, 
it maps out how the combination of stated targets can lead to different paths in terms of risk, depending on implementation progress and policy credibility. IMP 1.5°C and 
IMP <2°C are representative for IMP-GS (Sens. Neg; Ren), IMP-Neg, IMP-LD; IMP-Ren; IMP-SP . Note that the figure defines ‘High’ progress as higher, but it is important that the 
physical risk varies by region and country. This means, that ‘Moderate’ physical risk can be significant and even hardly absorbable for some countries.
The Paris Agreement recognised for the first time the key role of 
aligning financial flows to climate goals. It further emphasises 
the importance of making financial flows consistent with climate 
actions and SDGs (Zamarioli et  al. 2021).This alignment has now 
to be operated in a  specific environment where the scaling-up of 
climate policies is conditional upon their contribution to post-
COVID-19 recovery packages (Sections  15.2.2 and 15.2.3 and 
Box  15.6). The enabling environments that are to be established 
account for the structural parameters of the underinvestment in 
long-term assets. The persistent gap between the ‘propensity to save’ 
and ‘propensity to invest’ (Summers 2016) obstructs the scaling 
up of climate investments, and it results from a short-term bias of 
economic and financial decision-making (Miles 1993; Bushee 2001; 
Black and Fraser 2002) that returns weighted on short-term risk 
dominate the investment horizon of financial actors. Overcoming this 
bias is the objective of an enabling environment apt to launch of 
a self-reinforcing circle of trust between project initiators, industry, 
institutional investors, the banking system, and governments.
The role of government is crucial for creating an enabling 
environment for climate (Clark 2018), and governments are critical 
in the launching and maintenance of this circle of trust by lowering 
the political, regulatory, macroeconomic and business risks (high 
confidence). The issue is not just to progressively enlarge the space 
of low-carbon investments but to replace one system (fossil fuels 
energy system) rapidly with another (low-carbon energy system). 
This is a wave of ‘creative destruction’ with the public support for 
developing new markets and new entrepreneurship and finance for 
green products and technologies in a context which requires strong 
complementarities between Schumpeterian (technological) and 
Keynesian (demand-related) policies (Dosi et al. 2017). However, it 
is challenging to overcome the constraint of public budget under the 
pressure of competing demands and of creditworthy constraints for 
countries that do not have an easy access to reserve currencies. It is 
needed to maximise, both at the national and international levels, the 
leverage ratio of public funds engaged in blended finance for climate 
change which is currently very low, especially in developing countries 
(Attridge and Engen 2019).
Transparency: Policy de-risking measures, such as robust policy 
design and better transparency, as well as financial de-risking 
measures, such as green bonds and guarantees, at both domestic 
and international levels, enhance the attractiveness of clean 
energy investments (high confidence) (Steckel and Jakob 2018). 
Organisations such as the Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD) can help increase capital markets’ climate 
financing, including private sector, by providing financial markets 
with information to price climate-related risks and opportunities 
(TCFD 2020). However, risk disclosures alone would likely be 
insufficient as long as market failures that inhibit the emergence of 
low-carbon investment initiatives with positive risk-weighted returns 
(high confidence) (Christophers 2017; Ameli et al. 2020).
Central banks and climate change. Central banks in all economies 
will likely have to play a  critical role in supporting the financing of fiscal operations, particularly in a  post-COVID-19 world (high 
confidence). Instruments and institutional arrangements for better 
international monetary policy coordination will likely be necessary in 
the context of growing external debt stress and negative credit rating 
pressures facing both emerging and low-income countries. Central 
bankers have started examining the implications of disruptive risks 
of climate change, as part of their core mandate of managing the 
stability of the financial system (Chenet et al. 2021). Climate-related 
risk assessments and disclosure, including central banks’ stress 
testing of climate change risks, can be considered as a  first step 
(Rudebusch 2019), although such risk assessments and disclosure 
may not be enough by themselves to spur increased institutional 
low-carbon climate finance (Ameli et al. 2020).
Green quantitative easing (QE) is now being examined as a tool for 
enabling climate investments (Dafermos et al. 2018) in which central 
banks could explicitly conduct a  programme of purchases of low-
carbon assets (Aglietta et al. 2015). A green QE programme ‘would 
have the benefit of providing large amounts of additional liquidity 
to companies interested’ in green projects (medium confidence) 
(Campiglio et  al. 2018). Green QE would have positive effects 
for stimulating a  low-carbon transition, such as accelerating the 
development of green bond markets (Hilmi et al. 2021), encouraging 
investments and banking reserves, and reducing risks of stranded 
assets, while it might increase income inequality and financial 
instability (Monasterolo and Raberto 2017). While the short-term 
effectiveness would not be substantial, the central bank’s purchase 
of green bonds could have a positive effect on green investment in 
the long run (Dafermos et al. 2018). However, the use of green QE 
needs to be cautious on potential issues, such as undermining the 
central bank’s independence, affecting the central bank’s portfolio 
by including green assets with poor financial risk standards, and 
potential regulatory capture and rent-seeking behaviours (Krogstrup 
and Oman 2019).
Additional monetary policies and macroprudential financial 
regulation may facilitate the expected role of carbon pricing on 
boosting low-carbon investments (medium confidence) (D’Orazio 
and Popoyan 2019). Commercial banks may not respond to the price 
signal and allocate credits to low-carbon investments due to the 
existence of market failure (Campiglio 2016). This could support the 
productivity of green capital goods and encourage green investments 
in the short term, but might cause financial instability by raising 
non-performing loans ratio of dirty investments and creating green 
bubbles (Dunz et al. 2021). Financial supervisors needs to implement 
stricter guidelines to overcome the greenwashing challenges 
(Caldecott 2020).
Efficient financial markets and financial regulation. An 
influential efficient financial markets hypothesis (Fama 1970, 1991, 
1997) proceeds from the assumption that in well-developed financial 
markets, available information at any point of time is already well 
captured in capital markets with many participants. Despite increasing 
challenges to the theory (Sewell 2011), especially by repeated 
episodes of global financial crashes and crises, and other widely 
noted anomalies, a weaker form of the efficient markets hypothesis 
may still apply (medium confidence). It is arguable that accumulating 
rising levels of climate finance. Banks and institutional investors 
are also progressively rebalancing their investment portfolios away 
from fossil fuels and towards low-carbon investments (IEA 2019b; 
Monasterolo and de Angelis 2020). In the meantime, the world runs 
the risk of sharp adjustments, crises and irreversible ‘tipping points’ 
(Lontzek et al. 2015) sufficiently destabilising climate outcomes. This 
leads to the policy prescription towards financial regulatory agencies 
requiring greater and swifter disclosure of information about rising 
climate risks faced by financial institutions in projects and portfolios 
and central bank attention to systemic climate risk problems as 
one possible route of policy action (Carney 2015; Dietz et al. 2016; 
Zenghelis and Stern 2016; Campiglio et al. 2018). However, disclosure 
requirements of risks and information in private settings remain 
mostly voluntary and difficult to implement (Battiston et  al. 2017; 
Monasterolo et al. 2017).
Nevertheless, financial markets are innovating in search of solutions 
(Section  15.6.6). Recognising and dealing with stranded fossil 
fuel assets is also a  key area of growing concern that financial 
institutions are beginning to grapple with. Larger institutions with 
more patient capital (pensions, insurance) are also increasingly 
beginning to enter the financing of projects and green bond markets. 
The case for efficient financial markets in developing countries is 
worse (Abbasi and Riaz 2016; Hong et al. 2019) because of weaker 
financial institutions (Hamid et al. 2017), heightened credit rationing 
behaviour (Bond et al. 2015), and high risk aversion as most markets 
are rated as junk, or below/barely investment grade (Hanusch 
et  al. 2016). Other constraints such as limited long-term financial 
instruments and underdeveloped domestic capital markets, absence 
of significant domestic bond markets for investments other than 
sovereign borrowing, and inadequate term and tenor of financing, 
make the efficient markets thesis practically inapplicable for most 
developing countries.
Markets, finance and creative destruction. Branches of macro-
innovation theory could be grouped into two principal classes 
(Mercure et  al. 2016): ‘equilibrium  – optimisation’ theories that 
treat innovators as rational perfectly informed agents and reaching 
equilibrium under market price signals; and ‘non-equilibrium’ theory 
where market choices are shaped by history and institutional forces 
and the role of public policy is to intervene in processes, given 
a historical context, to promote a better outcome or new economic 
trajectory. The latter suggests that new technologies might not 
find their way to the market without price or regulatory policies to 
reduce uncertainty on expected economic returns. A key issue is the 
perception of risk by investors and financial institutions. The financial 
system is part of complex policy packages involving multiple 
instruments (cutting subsidies to fossil fuels, supporting clean 
energy innovation and diffusion, levelling the institutional playing 
field and making risks transparent) (Polzin 2017) and the needed big 
systemic push (Kern and Rogge 2016) requires it takes on the role of 
‘institutional innovation intermediaries’ (Polzin et al. 2016).
As far as climate finance is concerned, public R&D support had 
large cross-border knowledge spill-overs indicating that openness to trade was important, capacity expansion had positive effects on 
learning-by-doing on innovation over time, and that feed-in-tariffs 
(FiTs), in particular, had positive impacts on technology diffusion 
(Grafström and Lindman 2017) (Box 16.4). The FiTs programme has 
been associated with rapid increase in early renewables capacity 
expansion across the world by reducing market risks in financing and 
stability in project revenues (Menanteau et al. 2003; Jacobsson et al. 
2009) (Section 9.9.5). Competitive auctions where the bidder with 
the lowest price or other criteria is selected for government’s call for 
tender are increasingly being utilised as an alternative to FITs due to 
their strengths of flexibility, potential for real price discovery, ability 
to ensure greater certainty in price and quantity, and capability to 
guarantee commitments and transparency (IRENA and CEM 2015).
Outside of renewable energy, scattered but numerous examples are 
available on the role of innovative public policy to spur and create 
new markets and technologies (Arent et al. 2017): (i) proactive role 
of the state in energy transitions (e.g., the retirement of all coal-fired 
power plants in Ontario, Canada, between 2007 and 2014 (Kern 
and Rogge 2016; Sovacool 2016)); (ii) too early exit and design 
problems not considering the market acceptability and financing 
issues (e.g., energy-efficient retrofitting in housing in UK (Rosenow 
and Eyre 2016), low or negative returns in reality versus engineering 
estimates in weatherisation programmes in US (Fowlie et al. 2018)); 
and (iii) energy performance contracting for sharing the business 
risks and profits and improving energy efficiency (energy service 
companies (Bertoldi and Boza-Kiss 2017; Qin et al. 2017) and utility 
energy service contracts in the USA (Clark 2018)).
Crowding out. Literature has discussed the risks of low effectiveness 
of public interventions and of a  crowding out effect of climate-
targeted public support to other innovation sectors (Buchner et al. 
2013). However, much academic literature suggests no strong 
evidence of crowding out. (Deleidi et al. 2020). Examining the effect 
of public investment on private investment into renewables in 

out or in does not apply well to sectoral studies and found that public 
investments positively support private investments in general.
Support climate action via carbon pricing, taxes, and emission 
trading systems. Literature and evidence suggest that futures 
markets regarding climate are incomplete because they do not price 
in externalities (Scholtens 2017). As a result, low-carbon investments 
do not take place to socially and economically optimal levels, and 
the correct market signals would involve setting carbon prices 
high enough or equivalent trading in reduced carbon emissions 
by regulatory action to induce sufficient and faster shift towards 
low-carbon investments (high confidence) (Aghion et  al. 2016). 
Nonetheless, durable carbon pricing in economic and political 
systems must be implemented and approached combining related 
elements to both price and quantity (Grubb 2014).
The introduction of fiscal measures, such as carbon taxes, or market-
based pricing, such as emission trading schemes, to reflect carbon 
pricing have benefits and drawbacks that policymakers need to 
consider, taking account of both country-specific conditions and 
implement carbon pricing, especially in developing countries, because 
countries can utilise the existing fiscal tools and do not need concrete 
enabling conditions as market-based frameworks (high confidence). 
The reallocation of revenues from carbon taxes can be used for 
low-carbon investments, supporting poorer sections of society and 
fostering technological change (High-Level Commission on Carbon 
Prices 2017). In combination with other policies, such as subsidies 
and public R&D on resource-saving technologies, properly designed 
carbon taxes can facilitate the shift towards low-carbon, resource-
efficient investments (Bovari et  al. 2018; Naqvi and Stockhammer 
2018; Dunz et al. 2021) (Section 9.9.3). The effectiveness of carbon 
pricing has been supported by various evidence. EU ETS has 
cut emissions by 42.8% in the main sectors covered (European 
Commission 2021a), and China had achieved emissions reductions 
and energy conservation through its pilot ETS between 2013 and 

administrative prudence, appropriate carbon revenue management 
and stakeholder engagement are key ingredients for successful ETS 
regimes (Narassimhan et al. 2018).
The presence of carbon prices can promote low-carbon technologies 
and investments (Best and Burke 2018), and price signals, including 
carbon taxation, provide powerful and efficient incentives for 
households and firms to reduce CO 2 emissions (IMF 2019). The 
expansion of carbon prices is dependent on country-specific fiscal 
and social policies to hedge against regressive impacts on welfare, 
competitiveness, and employment (Michaelowa et  al. 2018). Such 
impacts need to be offset using the proceeds of carbon taxes 
or auctioned emission allowances to reduce distortive taxation 
(Bovenberg and de Mooij 1994; Goulder 1995; de Mooij 2000; 
Chiroleu-Assouline and Fodha 2014) and fund compensating 
measures for the population sections that are most adversely 
impacted (Combet et al. 2010; Jaccard 2012; Klenert et al. 2018). This 
is more difficult for developing countries with a large share of energy-
intensive activities, fossil fuel exporting countries and countries 
which have lower potential to mitigate impacts due to lower wages 
or existing taxes (Lefèvre et al. 2018).
Non-carbon price instruments, such as market-oriented regulation 
and public programmes involving low-carbon infrastructure, may 
be preferable in developing countries where market and regulatory 
failure and political economy constraints are more prevalent (Finon 
2019). While carbon pricing was suggested by many economists 
and researchers (Nordhaus 2015; Pahle et al. 2018), overcoming the 
political and regulatory barriers would be necessary for the further 
implementation of an effective carbon pricing scheme nationally and 
internationally. Without strong political support, the effectiveness 
of carbon pricing would be limited to least-cost movements 
(Meckling et al. 2015).
Role of domestic financing sources. Efforts to address climate 
change can be scaled up through the mobilisation of domestic 
funds (Fonta et  al. 2018). Publicly organised and supported low-
carbon infrastructures through resurrected national development 
banks may be justified (Mazzucato and Penna 2016). It is important to efficiently allocate the public financing, and State Investment 
Banks (SIBs) can take up key roles (i) to provide capital to assist with 
overcoming financial barriers, (ii) to signal and direct investments 
towards green projects, and (iii) to attract private investors by taking 
up a de-risking role. Also, they can become a first mover by investing 
in new and innovative technologies or business models (Geddes 
et al. 2018). State-owned enterprises (SOEs) can also have an overall 
positive effect on renewables investments, outweighing any effect of 
crowding out private competitors (Prag et al. 2018). Green investment 
banks can assist in the green transition by developing valuable 
expertise in implementing effective public interventions to overcome 
investment barriers and mobilise private investment in infrastructure 
(OECD 2015c). De-risking measures may reduce investment risks, 
but lacking research and data availability hinders designing such 
measures (Dietz et al. 2016). Local governments’ efforts to de-risk by 
securitisation might have negative effects by narrowing the scope for 
a green developmental state and encouraging privatisation of public 
services (Gabor 2019).
The potential role of coordinated multilateral initiatives. 
There is a growing awareness of the low leverage ratio of public to 
private capital in climate blended finance (Blended Finance Taskforce 
2018b) and of a ‘glass ceiling’, caused by a mix of agencies’ inertia 
and perceived loss of control over the use of funds, on the use of 
public guarantees by MDBs to increase it (high confidence) (Gropp 
et al. 2014; Schiff and Dithrich 2017; Lee et al. 2018). Many proposals 
have emerged for multilateral guarantee funds: Green Infrastructure 
Funds (de Gouvello and Zelenko 2010; Studart and Gallagher 2015), 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (Enhanced Green MIGA) 
(Déau and Touati 2018), guarantee funds to bridge the infrastructure 
investment gap (Arezki et al. 2016), and multi-sovereign guarantee 
mechanisms (Dasgupta et  al. 2019). The obstacle of limited fiscal 
space for economic recovery and climate actions in low-income and 
some emerging economies can be overcome only in a multilateral 
setting. Several multilateral actions are being envisaged: G20’s 
suspension of official bilateral debt payments, IMF’s adoption of new 
SDRs allocation (IMF 2021b). However, any form of unconventional 
debt relief will generate development and climate benefits only if 
they credibly target bridging the countries’ infrastructure gap with 
low-carbon climate-resilient options.
Of interest in multilateral settings is a  credibility-enhancing effect 
provided by reciprocal gains for both the donor and the host 
country. Guarantor countries can compensate the public cost of their 
commitments with the fiscal revenues of induced exports. As to the 
host countries, they would benefit from new capital inflows and the 
grant equivalents of reduced debt service which might potentially 
go far beyond USD100 billion yr–1 (Hourcade et al. 2021a). A second 
interest would be to support a learning process about agreed-upon 
assessment and monitoring methods using clear metrics. Developing 
standardised and science-based assessment methods at low 
transaction costs is essential to strengthen the credibility of green 
investments and the emergence of a pipeline of high-quality bankable 
projects which can be capitalised in the form of credible assets and 
supported with transparent and credible domestic spending. Multi-
sovereign guarantees would provide a quality backing to developing 
countries and allow for expanding developing countries’ access to 
capital markets at a lower cost and longer maturities, overcome the 
Basel III’s liquidity impediment and the EU’s Solvency II directive 
on liquidity (Blended Finance Taskforce 2018b), and accelerate the 
recognition of climate assets by investors seeking safe investment 
havens (Hourcade et  al. 2021b). They would also strengthen the 
efficacy of climate disclosure through high grades climate assets 
and minimise the risks of ‘greening’ of the portfolios by investing 
in ‘carbon neutral’ activities and not in low-carbon infrastructures. 
Finally, they would free up grant capacities for SDGs and adaptation 
that mostly involve non-marketable activities by crowding in private 
investments for marketable mitigation activities.
15.6.2.1 The Public-Private and Mobilisation Narrative 
and Current Initiatives
Financing by development finance institutions and development 
banks aims to address market failures and barriers related to limited 
access to capital as well as provide direct and indirect subsidisation 
by accepting higher risk, longer loan tenors and/or lower pricing. 
Many development and climate projects in developing and emerging 
countries have traditionally been supported with concessional loans by development finance institutions and/or international financial 
institutions (DFIs/IFIs). With an increasing number of sectors 
becoming viable and increasing complaints of private sector players 
with regard to crowding out (Bahal et al. 2018), a stronger separation 
and crowding in of commercial financing at the project/asset level 
is targeted. MDBs and IFIs were crucial for opening and growth in 
the early years of the green bonds, which represent a  substantial 
share of issuances (CBI 2019a). Drivers of an efficient private sector 
involvement are stronger incentives to have projects delivered on 
time and in budget as well as market competition (Hodge et  al. 
2018). It remains key that the private sector mobilisation goes hand 
in hand with institutional capacity building as well as strong sectoral 
development in the host country, as a strong, knowledgeable public 
partner with the ability to manage the private sector is a dominating 
success factor for public-private cooperation (WEF 2013; Yescombe 
2017; Hodge et al. 2018).
Limited research is available on the efficiency of mobilisation of 
the private sector at the various levels and/or the theory of change 
attached to the different approaches as applied in classical public-
private partnerships. Also, transparency on current flows and private 
involvement at the various levels is limited with no differentiation Box 15.5 | The Role of Enabling Environments for Decreasing Economic Cost 
of Renewable Energy
A widely used indicator for the relative attractiveness of renewable energy but also development of price levels is the levelised cost of 
energy (LCOE). It is applied by a wide range of public and private stakeholders when tracking progress with regard to cost degression 
(Aldersey-Williams and Rubert 2019). LCOE calculation methodologies vary but in principle consider project-level costs only (NEA 
1989). Besides other weaknesses, the LCOE concept usually does not consider societal costs resulting from de-risking instruments 
and/or other public interventions/support and therefore caution has to be applied when using the LCOE as the sole indicator of the 
success of enabling environments. The yearly IRENA mapping on renewable energy auction results demonstrates the extremely broad 
ranges of LCOEs (equal to the agreed tariffs) for renewable energy which can be observed (IRENA 2019a). For example, in 2018, 
solar PV LCOEs for utility-scale projects came in between USD0.04 kWh–1 and USD0.35 kWh–1 with a global weighted average of 
USD0.085 kWh–1. However, comparative analysis taking into account societal costs is hardly available driven by challenges in the 
context of the quantification of public support.
The GET FiT concept argued that the mitigation of political and regulatory risk by sovereign and international guarantees is cost-
efficient in developing countries, illustrating the estimated impact of such risk-mitigation instruments on equity and debt financing 
costs, and consequently required feed-in tariff levels (Deutsche Bank Climate Change Advisors 2011). The impact of financing costs on 
cost of renewable energy generation is well researched with significant differences across countries and technologies being observed, 
with major drivers being the regulatory framework as well as the availability and type of public support instruments (Geddes et al. 
2018; Steffen 2019). With a focus on developing countries and based on a case study in Thailand Huenteler et al. (2016) demonstrate 
the significant effect of regulatory environments but also local learning and skilled workforce on cost of renewables. The effect of 
those exceeds the one of global technology learning curves.
Egli et al. (2018) identify macroeconomic conditions (general interest rate) and experience effects within the renewable energy finance 
industry as key drivers in developed countries with a stable regulatory environment, contributing 5% (PV) and 24% (wind) to the 
observed reductions in LCOEs in the German market with a relatively stable regulatory environment. They conclude that ‘extant studies 
may overestimate technological learning and that increases in the general interest rate may increase renewable energies’ LCOEs, 
casting doubt on the efficacy of plans to phase out policy support’ (Egli et al. 2018). A rising general interest rate level could heavily 
impact LCOEs – for Germany, a rise of interest rates to pre-financial crisis levels in five years could increase LCOEs of solar and wind 
by 11–25% respectively (Schmidt et al. 2019).
prioritisation and agreement on prioritisation of sectors and/or 
project categories being ready and/or preferred for direct private 
sector involvement might become a challenge in the coming years 
(high confidence) (Sudmant et al. 2017a; Sudmant et al. 2017b).
Public guarantees have been increasingly proposed to expand 
climate finance, especially from the private sector, with scarce public 
finance, by reducing the risk premium of the low-carbon investment 
opportunities (de Gouvello and Zelenko 2010; Emin et  al. 2014; 
Studart and Gallagher 2015; Schiff and Dithrich 2017; Lee et  al. 
2018; Steckel and Jakob 2018). They have the advantage of a broad 
coverage including the ‘macro’ country risks and to tackle the up-
front risks during the preparation, bidding and development phases 
of the project lifecycle that deter project initiators, especially for 
capital-intensive and immature options. Insurances are also powerful 
de-risking instruments (Déau and Touati 2018) but they entitle the 
issuer to review claims concerning events and cannot cope with 
up-front costs. Contractual arrangements like power purchase 
agreements are powerful instruments to reduce market risks through 
a guaranteed price but they weigh on public budgets. Risk-sharing 
that brings together public agencies, firms, local authorities, private 
corporates, professional cooperatives, and institutional financiers can 
reduce costs (UNEP 2011), and support the deployment of innovative 
business models (Déau and Touati 2018). Combined with emission 
taxes they can contribute to reducing credit rationing of immature 
and risky low-carbon technologies (Haas and Kempa 2020).
15.6.3 Considerations on Availability and Effectiveness 
of Public Sector Funding
The gap analysis as well as other considerations presented in this 
chapter illustrate the critical role of increased volumes and efficient 
allocation of public finance to reach the long-term global goals, both 
nationally and internationally.
Higher public spending levels driven by the impacts of 
COVID-19 and related recovery packages. Higher levels of public 
funding represent a  massive chance but also a  substantial risk. 
A missing alignment of public funding and investment activity with 
the Paris Agreement (and Sustainable Development Goals) would 
result in significant carbon lock-ins, stranded assets and thus increase 
transition risks and ultimately economic costs of the transition (high 
confidence). Using IMF data for stimulus packages, Andrijevic et al. 
(2020) estimated that COVID-19-related fiscal expenditure had 
surpassed USD12 trillion by October 2020 (80% in OECD countries), 
a  third of which being spent in liquidity support and health care. 
Total stimulus pledged to date is ten times higher than low-Paris-
consistent carbon investment needs from 2020–2024 (Andrijevic 
et  al. 2020; Vivid Economics 2020). Overall, stimulus packages 
launched include USD3.5 trillion to sectors directly affecting future 
emissions, with overall fossil fuel investment flows outweighing low-
carbon technology investment (Vivid Economics 2020).
Lessons from the global financial crises show that although 
deep economic crises create a  sharp short-term emission drop, and green stimulus is argued to be the ideal response to tackle 
both the economic and the climate crises at once, disparities 
between regional strategies hinder the low-carbon transition (high 
confidence). Indeed, inconsistent policies within countries can also 
counterbalance emission reductions from green stimulus, as well as 
a lack of transparency and green spending pledged not materialising 
(Jaeger et al. 2020). Also, aggressive monetary policy as a response 
to the global financial crisis, including quantitative easing that did 
not target low-carbon sectors, has been heavily criticised (Jaeger 
et al. 2020). The COVID-19 crisis recovery, in contrast, benefits from 
developments which have taken place since, such as an emerging 
climate-risk awareness from the financial sector, reflected in the 
call from the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action 
(Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action 2020), which unites 

The steep decrease in renewable electricity costs since 2010 also 
represents a relevant driver for a low-carbon recovery (Jaeger et al. 
2020). Many more sectors are starting to show similar opportunities 
for rapid growth with supportive public spending such as low-carbon 
transport and buildings (IEA 2020d). Expectations that the package 
will increase economic activity rely on the assumption that increased 
credit will have a positive effect on demand, the so-called demand-
led policy (Mercure et al. 2019). Boosting investment should propel 
job creation, increasing household income and therefore demand 
across economic sectors (high confidence). A similar plan has also 
been proposed by the US administration and the European Union 
through the Next Generation EU (European Council 2020).
Nevertheless, three uncertainties remain. First, only those countries 
and regions with highest credit-ratings (AAA or AA) with access to 
deep financial markets and excess savings will be able to mount 
such counter-cyclical climate investment paths, typically high-income 
developed economies (high confidence). In more debt constrained 
developing countries lower access to global savings pools  because 
of higher risk perceptions and lower credit ratings (BBB or less), 
exacerbated by COVID-19, are already leading to credit downgrades 
and defaults (Kose et al. 2020) and have long tended to be fiscally pro-
cyclical (McManus and Ozkan 2015). These include the general class 
of virtually all major emerging and especially low-income developing 
countries, to which such demand-stimulating counter-cyclical climate-
consistent borrowing path is likely. To access such funds, these 
countries would need globally coordinated fiscal policy and explicit 
supporting cross-border instruments, such as sovereign guarantees, 
strengthening local capital markets and boosting the USD100 billion 
annual climate finance commitment (Dasgupta et al. 2019).
Second, a  strong assumption is that voters will be politically supportive 
of extended and increased fiscal deficit spending on climate on 
top of COVID-19-related emergency spending and governments 
will overcome treasury biases towards fiscal conservatism (to 
preserve credit ratings). However, evidence strongly suggests that 
voters (and credit rating agencies) tend to be fiscally conservative 
(Peltzman 1992; Lowry et al. 1998; Alesina et al. 2011; Borge and 
Hopland 2020), especially where expenditures involve higher taxes 
in the future and do not identifiably flow back to their local bases 
(the ‘public good’ problem) (high confidence). Such mistrust has 
(most recently during global financial crisis) and may benefit for 
political support by consistently reframing the climate expenditures 
in terms of job creation benefits (Bougrine 2012), effectiveness of 
least-cost fiscal spending on climate for reviving private activity, 
and the avoidance of catastrophic losses (Huebscher et, al. 2020) 
from higher carbon emissions.  A new understanding of debt 
sustainability including negative implications of deferred climate 
investments on future GDP has not yet been mainstreamed (see more on the debt sustainability discussion below (e.g., Buhr et al. 
2018; Fresnillo 2020a). In addition, implications on the availability 
of international public finance flows are not yet clear since current 
additional funding prioritises urgent health care support rather than 
an increase in predictable mid-/long-term financial support. Heavy 
investment needs for recovery packages in developed countries on 
the one hand and their international climate finance commitments 
on the other might be perceived to compete for available ‘perceived 
as appropriate’ budgets.
Box 15.6 | Macroeconomics and Finance of a Post-COVID-19 Green Stimulus Economic 
Recovery Path
Financial history suggests that capital markets may be willing to accommodate extended public borrowing for transient spending 
spikes (Barro 1987) when macroeconomic conditions suggest excess savings relative to private investment opportunities (Summers 
2015) and when public spending is seen as timely, effective and productive, with governments able to repay when conditions improve 
as economic crisis conditions abate (high confidence). A surge in global climate mitigation spending in the post-pandemic recovery 
may be an important opportunity, which global capital markets are signalling (Global Investor Statement 2019). The standard ‘neo-
classical’ macroeconomic model is often used in integrated energy-economy-climate assessments (Balint et al. 2016; Nordhaus 2018). 
This class of Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) models, however, has a limited treatment of the financial sector and assumes 
that all resources and factors of production are fully employed, there is no idle capacity and no inter-temporal financial intermediation 
(Pollitt and Mercure 2018b). Investment cannot assume larger values than the sum of previously determined savings, as a fixed 
proportion of income. Such constraint, as stressed by Mercure et al. (2019), implies that investment in low-carbon infrastructure, under 
the equilibrium assumptions, necessarily creates a (neo-Ricardian) crowding-out effect that contracts the remaining sectors. Box 15.6, 
Figure 1 shows the implications (in the red-shaded part of Figure 1).
Post-Keynesian demand-side macroeconomic models, with financial sectors and supply-side effects, in contrast, allow for the reality 
of non-equilibrium situations: persistent short- to medium-term underemployed economy-wide resources and excess savings over 
investment because of unexpected shocks, such as COVID-19. In these settings, economic stimulus packages allow a faster recovery 
Non-equilibrium /
Money creation
Equilibrium /
Crowding-out – no borrowingChange in GDP relative to baselineTimeDebt repayment phase
Return to optimal investment trajectoryEnergy Transition
??Year 2050
Investment /
Borrowing phase
Resource diversion /
Crowding-out
Box  15.6, Figure  1  | Two worlds  – energy transition outcomes under alternative model assumptions (Keynesian vs General Equilibrium).  
Source: Mercure et al. (2019).
Considerations on global debt levels and debt sustainability 
as well as implications for climate finance. The Paris Agreement 
marked the consensus of the international community that 
a temperature increase of well below 2°C needs to be achieved and 
the SR1.5 has demonstrated the economic viability of 1.5°C. However, 
in terms of increase of supply of, in particular, public finance, often the 
debate is still driven by the question on affordability, considerations 
around financial debt sustainability and budgetary constraints 
against the background of macroeconomic headwinds – even more 
in the (post-)COVID-19 world (high confidence). The level of climate 
alignment of debt is hardly considered in debt-related regulation and/
or debt sustainability agreements like the Maastricht Treaty ceilings 
(3% of GDP government deficit and 60% of GDP (gross) government 
debt) not considering economic costs of deferred climate action as 
well as economic benefits of the transformation.Robust studies on the economic costs and benefits in the 
short- to long-term of reaching the LTGG exist for only few 
countries and/or regions, primarily in the developed world (high 
confidence) (e.g. BCG 2018; McKinsey 2020a). With many studies 
underpinning the strong economic rationale for high investments 
in the short-term(e.g.,  McKinsey 2020a), regional differences are 
significant highlighting the need for extensive cooperation and 
solidarity initiatives.
For many developing countries, the focus of debt sustainability 
discussions is on the negative effect of climate change on the future 
GDP and the uncertainty with regard to short-term effects of climate 
change and their economic implications (high confidence). With long-
term economic impacts of climate change being in the focus of the 
modelling community, the volatility of GDP in the short term driven with demand-led effects: ‘Economic multipliers are near zero when the economy operates near capacity. In contrast, during crises such 
as the GFC, economic multipliers can be high’ (Blanchard and Leigh 2013; Hepburn et al. 2020b). The expected results are opposite 
to the standard supply-led equilibrium models as a response to investment stimulus (the green-shaded part of Box 15.6, Figure 1), as 
intended by ‘green-stimulus’ packages such as proposed by the EU (Balint et al. 2016; Mercure et al. 2019).
Even if demand-led models work better in depressions, the question nevertheless is whether the additional public borrowing for such 
‘green stimulus’ can be undertaken by market borrowings given already high public debt levels and recovered in the future from taxes 
as the economy revives. The results of recent macroeconomic modelling work (Liu et al. 2021) represented by 10 major countries/
regions suggests answers. It uses a non-standard macroeconomic framework, with Keynesian features such as financial and labour 
market rigidities and fiscal and monetary rules (McKibbin and Wilcoxen 2013). First, a global ‘green stimulus’ of about an average of 
0.8% of GDP annually in additional fiscal spending between 2020–30 would be required to accelerate the emissions reduction path 
required for a 1.5°C transition. Second, such a stimulus would also accelerate the global recovery by boosting GDP growth rates by 
about 0.6% annually during the critical post-COVID period. Third, the optimal tax policy would be to backload the carbon taxes to 
later in the macroeconomic cycle, both because this would avoid dampening near-term growth while pre-announced carbon tax plans 
would incentivise long-term private energy transition investment decisions today and provide neutral borrowing. This macroeconomic 
modelling path thus replicates the ‘green stimulus’ impacts expected in theory (Box 15.6, Figure 1). There are also some other additional 
features of the modelled proposal: (i) fiscal stimulus – needed in the aftermath of the pandemic – can be an opportunity to boost green 
and resilient public infrastructure; (ii) green research and development ‘subsidies’ are feasible to boost technological innovations; and 
(iii) income transfers to lower income groups are necessary to offset negative impacts of rising carbon taxes.
Substantial effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is relatively unique in its public health impacts when combined with the 
consequences of deep economy-wide shocks (economic downturn, public finances, and debt), are expected to last for decades 
even in the absence of no significant future recurrence. A scenario where the pandemic recurs mildly every year for the foreseeable 
future further hinders GDP and investment recovery, where growth is unlikely to rebound to previous trajectories, even within OECD 
economies (McKibbin and Vines 2020) and with worse effects in developing regions. History is strongly supportive: studies on the 
longevity of pandemics’ impacts indicate significant macroeconomic effects persisting for decades, with depressed real rates of return, 
increased precautionary savings (Jordà et al. 2020), unemployment (Rodríguez-Caballero and Vera-Valdés 2020) and social unrest 
(Barrett and Chen 2021). The direct effect on emissions is likely to be a small reduction from previous trajectories, but the longer-
lasting impacts are more on the macroeconomic-finance side. Pandemic responses have increased sovereign debt across countries 
in all income bands (IMF 2021e). However, its sharp increase in most developing economies and regions has caused debt distress 
(Bulow et al. 2021), widening the gap in developing countries’ access to capital (Hourcade et al. 2021b). While strong coordinated 
international recovery strategies with climate-compatible economic stimulus is justified (Barbier 2020; Barbier and Burgess 2020; 
IMF 2020c; Le Quéré et al. 2021; Pollitt et al. 2021), national recovery packages announced do not show substantial alignment with 
climate goals (D’Orazio 2021; Hourcade et al. 2021b; Rochedo et al. 2021; Shan et al. 2021). Contradictory post-COVID-19 investments 
in fossil fuel-based infrastructure may create new carbon lock-ins, which would either hinder climate targets or create stranded assets 
(Hepburn et al. 2020a; Le Quéré et al. 2021; Shan et al. 2021), whilst deepening global inequalities (Hourcade et al. 2021b).Box 15.6 (continued)
deep-dives. IPCC scenario data is often not sufficient to perform such 
analysis with additional assumptions being needed (Acevedo 2016). 
For debt sustainability analysis, these more short-term impacts are, 
however, a  crucial driver with transparency being limited to the 
significance of climate-related revision of estimates. The latter might 
result in a continued overestimation of future GDP as happened in 
the past, increasing the vulnerability of highly indebted countries 
(Guzman 2016; Mallucci 2020). While climate change considerations 
have already impacted country ratings and debt sustainability 
assessments (and financing costs), it is unclear whether current 
GDP forecasts are realistic. The review of the IMF debt sustainability 
framework leads to a  stronger focus on vulnerability rather than 
only income thresholds when deciding upon eligibility for debt relief 
and/or concessional resources (Mitchell 2015), which could become 
a mitigation factor for the challenge described before.
Debt levels globally but particularly in developing and vulnerable 
countries have significantly increased over the past years with 
current and expected climate change impacts further burdening 
debt sustainability (high confidence). For low- and middle-income 
countries, 2018 marked a  new peak of debt levels amounting to 
51% of GDP; between 2010 and 2018, external debt payments as 
a percentage of government budget grew by 83% in low- and middle-
income countries, from an average of 6.71% in 2010 to an average 
of 12.56% in 2018 (Fresnillo 2020b). COVID-19 has further reduced 
the fiscal space of many developing governments and/or increased 
the likelihood of debt stress. With many vulnerable countries 
already being burdened with higher financing costs, this limited 
fiscal space further shrinks their ability to actively steer the required 
transformation (Buhr et al. 2018). Limited progress in increasing debt 
transparency remains another burden (Section 15.6.7).
Considering the need for responses to both short-term liquidity 
issues and long-term fiscal space, current G20/IMF/World Bank debt 
service suspension initiatives are focused on the liquidity issue rather 
than underlying problems of more structural nature of many low-
income countries (Fresnillo 2020a). In order to ensure fiscal space 
for climate action in the coming decade, a mix between debt relief, 
deferrals of liabilities, extended debt levels and sustainable lending 
practices including new solidarity structures need to be considered 
in addition to higher levels of bilateral and multilateral lending to 
reduce dependency on capital markets and to bridge the availability 
of sustainably structured loans for highly vulnerable and indebted 
countries. More standardised debt-for-climate swaps, a higher share 
of GDP-linked bonds or structures ensuring (partial) debt cancellation 
in case countries are hit by physical climate change impacts/shocks 
appear possible. The ‘hurricane’ clause introduced by Grenada, or 
wider natural disaster clauses provide issuers with an option to 
defer payments of interest and principal in the event of a qualifying 
natural disaster and can reduce short-term debt stress (UN Addis 
Ababa Action Agenda Art. 102) (UN 2015a). A mainstreaming of such 
clauses has been pushed by various international institutions. The 
collective action clause might be a good example of a loan/debt term 
which became market standard. Definition of triggers is likely the 
most complex challenge in this context.The use of debt-for-nature and debt-for-climate-swaps is still very 
limited and not mainstreamed but offers significant potential if used 
correctly (high confidence).
An increasing number of debt-for-climate/nature swaps have been 
seen in recent years applied primarily in international climate 
cooperation and in bilateral contexts, however, not (yet) to an extent 
addressing severe and acute debt crises (Essers et al. 2021; Volz et al. 
2021) offering significant potential if used correctly (Warland and 
Michaelowa 2015). Significant lead times, needs-based structuring, 
transparency with regard to the additionality of financed climate 
action, uncertainty with regard to own resource constraints and ODA 
accountability remain as barriers for a massive scale-up needed to 
make transactions relevant (Mitchell 2015; Fuller et al. 2018; Essers 
et al. 2021). At the same time, the limitation of the use of debt-based 
instruments as a response to climate-related disasters and counter-
cyclical loans might be necessary (Griffith-Jones and Tyson 2010).
Ensuring efficient debt restructuring and debt relief in events of 
extreme shocks and imminent over-indebtedness and sovereign 
debt default are further crucial elements with a joint responsibility of 
debtors and creditors (UN 2015a). In this context, the Commonwealth 
Secretariat flagged that the diversification of the lender portfolio 
made debt restructuring more difficult with more and more 
heterogeneous stakeholders being involved (Mitchell 2015) and the 
UN AAAA raising concerns about non-cooperative creditors and 
disruption of timely completion of debt restructuring (UN 2015a). 
This is a side effect of a stronger use of capital markets, which needs 
to be carefully considered in the context of sovereign bond issuances 
(Section 15.6.7).
Stranded assets. The debate around stranded assets focuses strongly 
on the loss of value to financial assets for investors (Section 15.6.1), 
however, stranded assets and resources in the context of the 
transition towards a low-emission economy ‘are expected to become 
a major economic burden for states and hence the tax payers’ (high 
confidence)  (EEAC 2016). Assets include not only financial assets 
but also infrastructure, equipment, contracts, know-how, jobs as 
well as stranded resources (Bos and Gupta 2019). Besides financial 
investors and fiscal budgets, consumers remain vulnerable to stranded 
investments. Against the background of the frequent simultaneousness 
of losses occurring for financial investors on the one hand and negative 
employment effects as well as regional development and fiscal effects 
on the other hand, negotiations about compensations and public 
support to compensate for negative effects of phasing out of polluting 
technologies often remain interlinked and compensation mechanisms 
and related redistribution effects untransparent.
Recent phase-out deals tend to aim for (partial or full) compensation 
rather than no relief for losses. In contrast to the line of argument in 
the tobacco industry, the backward-looking approach and a resulting 
obligation of compensation by investors in polluting assets can be 
observed rarely with the forward-looking approach of compensations 
by future winners for current losers dominating – despite the high 
level of awareness about carbon externalities and resulting climate 
change impacts among polluters for many years (van der Ploeg and 
a high level of investor protection also against much needed climate 
action which is also well illustrated by the share of claims settled 
in favour of foreign investors under the Energy Charter Treaty and 
investor-state dispute settlement (Bos and Gupta 2019).
Late government action can delay action and consequently strengthen 
the magnitude of action needed at a  later point in time with 
implications for employment and economic development in impacted 
regions requiring higher level of fiscal burden (high confidence). This 
has also been considered in the context of global climate cooperation 
with prolonged support for polluting infrastructure resulting in heavy 
lock-in effects and higher economic costs in the long run (Bos and 
Gupta 2019). Despite a  significant share of fossil resources which 
need to become stranded in developing countries to reach the 
LTGG, REDD+ remains a singular example for international financial 
cooperation in the context of compensation for stranded resources.
15.6.4 Climate Risk Pooling and Insurance Approaches
Since 2000, the world has been experiencing significant increase in 
economic losses and damages from natural disasters and weather 
perils such as tropical cyclones, earthquakes, flooding and drought. 
Total global estimate of damage is about USD4210 billion, 2000–2018 
(Aon Benfield UCL Hazard Research Centre 2019). The largest portion 
of this is attributed to tropical cyclones (USD1253 billion), followed 
by flooding (USD914 billion), earthquakes (USD757 billion) and 
drought (approximately USD372 billion, or about USD20 billion yr–1 
losses) (Aon Benfield UCL Hazard Research Centre 2019). In the 
period 2017–2018, natural catastrophe losses totalled approximately 
USD219 billion (Bevere 2019). According to the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, 14 weather and climate disasters cost 
USD91 billion in 2018 (NOAA NCEI 2019). The European Environment 
Agency reports that ‘disasters caused by weather and climate-related 
extremes accounted for some 83% of the monetary losses over the 
period 1980–2017’ for EU Member States (EU-28) and that ‘weather 
and climate-related losses amounted to EUR426 billion (at 2017 
values)’. For the EEA member countries (EEA-33), the ‘total reported 
economic losses caused by weather and climate-related extremes’ 
over the same period amounted to approximately EUR453 billion 
(EEA 2019). Asia Pacific and Oceania has been particularly impacted 
by typhoon and flooding (China, India, the Philippines) resulting in 
economic losses of USD58 billion, 2000–2017, and a  combination 
of flooding, typhoon and drought totalling USD89 billion in 2018 
(inclusive of loss by private insurers and government sponsored 
programmes (Aon Benfield UCL Hazard Research Centre 2019). Based 
on past historical analysis, a region such as the Caribbean, which has 
experienced climate-related losses equal to 1% of GDP each year 
since 1960, is expected to have significant increases in such losses 
in the future leading to possibly upwards of 8% of projected GDP 
in 2080 (Commonwealth Secretariat 2016). Similarly, Latin American 
countries, such as Argentina, El Salvador and Guatemala, experienced 
severe losses in agriculture totalling about USD6 billion due to 
drought in 2018 (Aon Benfield UCL Hazard Research Centre 2019). 
In the African region, where climate is projected to get significantly 
warmer, continuing severe drought in parts of East Africa, Tropical Cyclone Idai, had devastating economic impacts for Mozambique, 
Zimbabwe and Malawi (WMO 2019). According to Munich Re, loss 
from about 100 significant events in 2018 for Africa are estimated at 
USD1.4 billion (Munich Re 2019).
While there are questions about the sufficiency of insurance 
products to address the losses and damages of climate-
related disasters, insurance can help to cover immediate 
needs directly, provide rapid response and transfer financial 
risk in times of extreme crisis (high confidence) (GIZ 2015; 
Lucas 2015; Schoenmaker and Zachmann 2015; Hermann et al. 
2016; Wolfrom and Yokoi-Arai 2016; Kreft and Schäfer 2017; 
UNESCAP 2017; Matias et  al. 2018; UNECA 2018; Broberg 
and Hovani-Bue 2019; EEA 2019; Martinez-Diaz et  al. 2019). 
Commercial insurability is heavily driven by the predictability 
of losses and the resulting ability to calculate insurance 
premium levels properly. Climate change has become a major 
factor of increasing uncertainty. The previously strong reliance 
on historic data in calculation of premium levels may be but 
a starting point given the likely need for upward adjustment 
due to climate change and potential consequential economic 
damage. Different risk perceptions between policyholders and 
insurers will create contrary assessments on premium levels 
and consequently underinsurance. McKinsey (2020b) also 
stresses the systemic effect of climate change on insurers’ 
business models and resulting availability of appropriate 
insurance products.
The conventional approach to such protective or hedging position 
has been indemnity and other classical insurance micro-, meso- and 
macro-level schemes (Hermann et  al. 2016). These include micro 
insurance schemes such as index insurance and weather derivative 
approaches that cover individuals’ specific needs such as coverage 
for farm crops. Meso-level insurance schemes, which primarily benefit 
intermediary institutions, such as NGOs, credit unions, financial 
institutions and farmer credit entities, seek to reduce losses caused 
by credit default thereby ‘enhancing investment potential’, whereas 
macro-level insurance schemes ‘allow both insured and uninsured 
individuals to be compensated for damages caused by extreme 
weather events’ (Hermann et al. 2016). These macro-level insurance 
schemes include catastrophe bonds and weather derivatives and 
so on, that transfer risk to capital markets (Hermann et  al. 2016). 
Over the last decades, there has been a  trend towards weather-
index insurance and other parametric insurance products based on 
predefined pay-out risk pooling instruments. It has gained favour 
with governments in developing regions such as Africa, the Caribbean 
and the Pacific because it provides certainty and predictability about 
funding – financial preparedness – for emergency actions and initial 
reconstruction and reduces moral hazard. This ‘financial resilience’ is 
also increasingly appealing to the business sector, particularly micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), in developing countries 
(MEFIN Network and GI RFPI Asia 2016; Woods 2016; Schaer 
and Kuruppu 2018).
To date, sovereign parametric climate risk pooling as a  way of 
managing climate risk does not seem to have much traction in 
developed countries and does not appear to be attractive to 
climate risk pooling initiative (Kreft and Schäfer 2017). However, 
international bilateral donors such as the USAID and the UK 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO, formerly 
DFID), and the multilateral development banks are all, to different 
extent, supporters of the various climate risk pooling initiatives now 
operational in developing countries.
As noted also in IPCC AR5, risk sharing and risk transfer strategies 
provide ‘pre-disaster financing arrangements that shift economic 
risk from one party to another’ (IPCC 2012). Risk pooling among 
countries and regions is relatively advantageous when compared 
to conventional insurance because of the effective subsidising of 
‘affected regions’ using revenues from unaffected regions which 
involve pooling among a large subset of countries (high confidence) 
(Lucas 2015). In general, the premiums are less costly than what an 
individual country or entity can achieve and disbursement is rapid 
and there are also fewer transaction costs (Lucas 2015; World Bank 
2015). The World Bank argues that the experience with the Pacific 
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot (PCRIP) and Africa Risk Capacity 
risk pooling (ARC) show savings of 50% in obtaining insurance cover 
for pooled risk compared with purchasing comparable coverage 
individually (Lucas 2015; World Bank 2015; ARC 2016). However, 
it requires, as noted by UNESCAP , ‘extensive coordination across 
participating countries, and entities’ (Lucas 2015).
At the same time, this approach has substantial basis risk (actual 
losses do not equal financial compensation) (high confidence) 
(Hermann et al. 2016). With parametric insurance, pay-outs are pre-
defined and based on risk modelling rather than on-the-ground 
damage assessment so may be less than, equal to, or greater than 
the actual damage. It does not cover actual losses and damage and  
therefore, may be insufficient to meet the cost of rehabilitation 
and  reconstruction. It may also be ‘non-viable’ or damaging to 
livelihoods in the long run (UNFCCC 2008; Hellmuth et  al. 2009; 
Hermann et al. 2016). Additionally, if the required threshold is not met, 
there may be no pay-out, though a country may have experienced 
substantial damages from a  climatic event. This occurred for the 
Solomon Islands in 2014 which discontinued its insurance with the 
Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot when neither its Santa Cruz 
earthquake nor the 2014 flash floods were eligible to receive a pay-
out under the terms of the insurance (Lucas 2015).
Increasingly, climate risk insurance schemes are being blended 
into disaster risk management as part of a  comprehensive risk 
management approach (high confidence). The best-known example 
is the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF SPC 
2018), which involves cooperation among Caribbean states, Japan, 
Canada, UK and France and international organisations such as 
the World Bank (UNESCAP 2017). But there are growing platforms 
of such an approach mainly under the umbrella of the G7’s 
InsuResilience Initative (Deutsche Klimafinanzierung 2020), including, 
the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative for 

risk insurance (2) Insurance products which enable low carbon investments, and thereby contribute to increased efficiencies through cost-savings from cheaper low-carbon 
technologies’ (V20 2021).the Pacific Islands (PCRAFI), the African Risk Capacity (ARC Agency 
and its financial affiliate), and the African Risk Capacity Limited (ARC 
Ltd/ the ARC Group) (ARC 2016) and in the Asian region, the South 
East Asian Disaster Risk Insurance Facility (SEADRIF) and the ASEAN 
Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program (ADRFI), (SEADRIF 
2018; GIZ and World Bank 2019; Martinez-Diaz et  al. 2019; Vyas 
et al. 2019; World Bank 2019a). The group of 20 vulnerable countries 
(V20) has also developed a Sustainable Insurance Facility (SIF), billed 
as a  technical assistance facility for climate-smart14 insurance for 
MSMEs in 48 developing countries as well as potentially to de-risk 
renewable energy in these countries and regions (ACT Alliance 2020; 
V20 2020; V20 2021).
However, as noted above, climate risk pooling is not a  panacea. 
There are very obvious and significant challenges. According to 
Kreft and Schäfer (2017), limitations of insurance schemes include 
coordination challenges, limited scope, destabilisation due to exit of 
one or more members as premiums rise and inadequate attention to 
permanence (Schaeffer et al. 2014). There are also challenges with 
risk diversification, replication, and scalability (high confidence). For 
example, CCRIF is extending both its membership and diversifying 
its geographic dimensions into Central America in seeking to lower 
covariate risk (similar shocks among cohorts such as droughts or 
floods). Under the SPC portfolio, CCRIF is able to segregate risk 
across the regions. Risk insurance does not obviate from the need to 
engage in capacity building to scale-up as well as having process for 
addressing systemic risk. Currently, risk pools have limited sectoral 
reach and may cover agriculture but not other important sectors 
such as fisheries and public utilities. Only recently (July 2019) has 
CCRIF initiated coverage of fisheries with the development of its 
Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture Sustainability Facility (COAST) 
instrument (CCRIF SPC 2019; ACT Alliance 2020). Historically, risk 
pool mechanisms, like CCRIF and ARC, only cover a small subset of 
perils, such as tropical cyclones, earthquakes and excess rainfall but 
do not include other perils such as drought. Since 2016, ARC has 
increased its scope to cover drought and in 2019 launched ARC 
Replica, which not only covers drought but offers premiums and 
coverage to NGOs and the World Food Programme through the 
START Network and a pastoral drought product for protecting small 
farmers and ensuring food security. In some regions and countries, 
there may also be limited access to reinsurance (Schaeffer et  al. 
2014; Lucas 2015). An important down-side of climate risk pooling is 
that it does not cover the actual cost of damage and losses. Though 
on the positive side, pay-out may exceed costs, but it may also be 
less than costs. Hence, the parametric approach is not a  panacea 
and does not preclude having recourse to conventional indemnity 
insurance, which will cover full damage costs after a climate change 
event as it involves full on-the-ground assessment of factors such as 
the necessity and costs of repair versus, say, replacement value of 
damaged infrastructure. This may be important for governmental and 
publicly provided services such as schools, hospitals, roads, airports, 
communications equipment and water supply facilities. Given 
the growing popularity of parametric insurance and climate risk 
on several fronts (Scherer 2017). Schoenmaker and Zachmann 
(2015) have proposed a  global climate risk pool to help the most 
vulnerable countries. The pathway to this includes capacity building 
in underdeveloped financing sectors of developing countries. 
They argue that as climate extremes become more normalised, they 
will wipe out significant parts of the infrastructure and productive 
capacity of developing countries. This will have knock-on impact 
on fiscal capacity due to lowered tax revenue and high rebuilding 
costs. ‘Developing countries’, Schoenmaker and Zachmann (2015) 
argue, ‘cannot insure against such events on a  market basis, nor 
would it be sensible to divert scarce fiscal resources away from 
infrastructure investment into accumulating a  financial buffer for 
such situations’. In that context, Schoenmaker and Zachmann (2015) 
call for international risk pooling as ‘the only sensible strategy’, 
especially if it addresses the major gaps in climate risk insurance for 
poor and vulnerable communities by enhancing demand through 
‘smart support instrument’ for premium support such as full or 
partial premium subsidies and investment in providing risk reduction 
(Schäfer et al. 2016; Le Quesne et al. 2017; MCII 2018; Vyas et al. 
2019). This, it is argued, may help to smoothen out the limited uptake 
of regional institutions such as ARC and CCRIF SPC, which are only 
in three regions of the world (with missing mechanism in South 
America) (Kreft and Schäfer 2017). Existing regional mechanisms, 
while they may perform very well, only cover a portion of climatic 
hazards and tend to have limited subscribers. For example, across the 
key four sovereign risk pools (ARC, CRIFSPC, PCRAFI and SEADRIF), 
though there are 68 countries only one-third or 32% have purchased 
coverage in 2019 and 46% ‘did not deploy disaster risk financing 
instruments’ (ACT Alliance 2020).
Other gaps and challenges flagged by Kreft and Schäfer (2017) 
include limited coverage of the full spectrum of contingency risks 
experienced by countries, inadequate role of risk management as 
a standard for all regional pools, though there are some emerging 
best practices in terms of data provision on weather-related risks, 
and incentivisation of risk reduction (high confidence). Here, they 
recognise the work of Africa Risk Capacity for not only providing the 
infrastructure to trigger disbursement but for also promoting national 
risk analysis. Another important gap in the landscape of climate risk 
pooling is lack of attention to financial institutions’ lending portfolios 
that are vulnerable to weather shocks. In this regard subsidies as part 
of innovative financing schemes facilitated by the donor community 
can encourage the uptake of meso-level climate risk insurance 
solutions (Kreft and Schäfer 2017).
In the literature, there are two attempts at systematic evaluation 
or comprehensive assessment of regional climate risk pools: 
a  comprehensive study by Scherer (2017) and FCDO’s ten-year 
evaluation (2015–2024). Overall, neither of these studies draw 
adverse conclusions about regional climate risk pooling initiatives/
mechanisms. According to Scherer, ‘it appears that insurances work 
in principle and there is certainly success’ and ‘initial experiences 
demonstrate regional climate risk insurances works’. The author 
cited the 28 pay-outs to 16 countries of USD106 million arguing that 
it provides cash-starved countries with much needed cash (Scherer 
2017, p. 4). The FCDO study (Scott 2017) examines the uptake of ARC and its impact on reducing vulnerability to disasters. It notes 
that there is scarce literature on disaster risk insurance mechanisms 
in terms of impacts. In its current sample of 20 countries as of 
November 2017, four are projected to experience food security crisis 
(IPC Level 3) but are not signatories to the ARC, which may signal 
that ARC is not attractive to all food insecure countries and that 
there is no overwhelming appetite for ARC among poorer countries. 
Additionally, Panda and Surminski (2020) research the importance 
of indicators and frameworks for monitoring the performance and 
impact of Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) but 
make no final assessment of any of the regional climate risk pool. 
However, they propose mechanisms to improve the transparency and 
accountability of the system. Scherer (2017), Forest (2018) and Panda 
and Surminski (2020) seem to indicate that there is ‘enthusiasm to 
support and scale-up regional climate risk insurance’ (Scherer 2017, 
p. 4) Examples of this support include: the Germany Ministry for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) has provided USD5.9 
million for the World Food Programme (WFP) to protect 1.2 million 
vulnerable African farmers with climate risk insurance, through ARC 
Replica, and the G7 InsuResilience Vision 2025, which has committed 
to ensuring 400–500 million poor persons are covered against disaster 
shock by pre-arranged finance and insurance mechanism by 2025; 
some of this will be through ARC (WFP 2020). Of course, this does 
not mean that risk pools are without challenges or are not failing on 
specific sets of metrics. Forest (2018) flags three failing areas: policy 
holder and hazard coverage, the cost of premium and risk transfer 
parameters, and the use of pay-out, which in most cases are up to 
the government. Here, ARC is flagged among the three regional risk 
pools, as the only one with contingency plan requirements that can 
support effective use of pay-outs. Other research exploring climate 
risk pooling and its impacts flag lack of transparency around pay-out, 
premium or risk transfer parameters. Ultimately, climate risk pools 
are not full insurance; they offer only limited coverage. Entities such 
as the U4 Anti-Corruption Help Desk are exploring how to mitigate 
potential corruption with regard to climate risk insurance.
15.6.5 Widen the Focus of Relevant Actors: Role of 
Communities, Cities and Subnational Levels
There is an urgency and demand to meet the financial needs of the 
climate change actions not only at the national level but also at 
the  subnational level, to achieve low-carbon and climate-resilient 
cities and communities (high confidence) (Barnard 2015; Moro 
et al. 2018). Scaling up subnational climate finance and investment 
is a necessary condition to achieve climate change mitigation and 
adaptation action (Ahmad et al. 2019).
The importance of exploring effective subnational climate 
finance. Stronger subnational climate action is indispensable to 
adapt cities to build more sustainable, climate-positive communities 
(Kuramochi et  al. 2020). It has transformative potential as a  key 
enabler of inclusive urban economic development through the 
building of resilient communities (high confidence) (Floater et  al. 
2017a; Colenbrander et  al. 2018b; Ahmad et  al. 2019). Yet the 
significant potential of subnational climate finance mechanisms 
remains unfulfilled. Policy frameworks, governance, and choices at 
et al. 2018b; Hadfield and Cook 2019). To scale climate investment, 
a systematicunderstanding of the preconditions to mobilising high-
potential financing instruments at the national and subnational 
levels is necessary.
Subnational climate finance needs and flows. Subnational 
climate finance covers financing mechanisms reaching or utilising 
subnational actors to develop climate positive investment in urban 
areas. The fragility of interconnected national and subnational 
finances affects subnational finance flows, including the impact 
of the social-economic crisis (Canuto and Liu 2010; Ahrend et  al. 
2013). The effect of deficit in investment for global infrastructure 
towards the growing subnational-level debt also creates pressure on 
subnational finances and constrains future access to financing (high 
confidence) (Smoke 2019).
The International Finance Corporation estimates a  cumulative 
climate investment opportunity of USD29.4 trillion across six urban 
sectors (waste, renewable energy, public transportation, water, EVs, 
and green buildings) in emerging market cities, cities in developing 
countries with more than 500,000 population, to 2030 (IFC 2018). 
However, the State of Cities Climate Finance report estimated that 
an average of USD384 billion was invested in urban climate finance 
annually in 2017–2018 (Negreiros et  al. 2021). The International 
Institute for Environment and Development estimates that out of the 
USD17.4 billion total investments in climate finance, less than 10% 
(USD1.5 billion) was approved for locally-focused climate change 
projects between 2003 and 2016 (Soanes et al. 2017).
Subnational climate public and private finance. Urban climate  
finance and investment are prominent in the subnational 
climate  finance landscape (CCFLA 2015; Buchner et  al. 2019). 
Finance mechanisms that can support climate investment for the 
urban sector include public-private partnerships (PPPs); international 
finance; national investment vehicles; pricing, regulation, standards; 
land value capture; debt finance; and fiscal decentralisation (Granoff 
et al. 2016; Floater et al. 2017b; Gorelick 2018; White and Wahba 
2019). Among these mechanisms, PPPs, debt finance, and land value 
capture have the potential to mobilise private finance (Ahmad et al. 
2019). Better standardisation in processes is needed, including those 
bearing on contracts and regulatory arrangement, to reflect local 
specificities (Bayliss and Van Waeyenberge 2018) (Section 15.6.1.1).
PPPs are particularly important in cities with mature financial systems 
as the effectiveness of PPPs depends on appropriate investment 
architecture at scale and government capacity (high confidence). Such 
cities can enable infrastructure such as renewable energy production 
and distribution, water networks, and building developments to 
generate consumer revenue streams that incentivise private investors 
to purchase equity as a long-term investment (Floater et al. 2017b).
National-level investment vehicles can provide leadership for 
subnational climate financing and crowd in private finance by 
providing early-stage market support to technologies or evidence 
related to asset performance and costs-benefits (high confidence). 
The use of carbon pricing is increasing at the subnational level along with regulation and standards on negative externalities, such 
as pollution, to steer investment towards climate financing (World 
Bank Group 2019).
Debt financing via subnational bonds and borrowing, including 
municipal bonds, is another potential tool for raising upfront capital, 
especially for rich cities (high confidence). The share of subnational, 
sub-sovereign, and sovereign bonds could grow over time, given 
efforts to expand the creditworthiness and ensure a  sufficient 
supply of own-source revenue to reduce the default risk. As of now, 
subnational and sub-sovereign bonds are constrained by public 
finance limits and the fiscal capacities of governments. However, 
while green bonds have potential for growth at the subnational level 
and may result in a lower cost of capital in some cases, the market 
faces challenges related to scaling up and has been associated with 
limited measurable environmental impact to date (Section 15.6.8). 
Further, bonds with lower credit ratings drive higher issuance costs 
for climate risk cities, for example, costs related to disclosure and 
reporting (Painter 2020).
Key challenges of subnational climate finance. Across all types 
of cities, five key challenges constrain the flow of subnational climate 
finance (high confidence): (i) difficulties in mobilising and scaling-
up private financing (Granoff et  al. 2016); (ii) deficient existing 
architecture in providing investment on the scale and with the 
characteristics needed (Anguelovski and Carmin 2011; Brugmann 
2012); (iii) political-economic uncertainties, primarily related to 
innovation and lock-in barriers that increase investment risks (Unruh 
2002; Cook and Chu 2018; White and Wahba 2019); (iv) the deficit in 
investment for global infrastructure affects the growing subnational-
level debt (Canuto and Liu 2010); and (v) insufficient positive value 
capture (Foxon et al. 2015).
Different finance challenges between rich and poor cities. 
Access to capital markets has been one of the major sources for 
subnational financing and is generally limited to rich cities, and much 
of this occurs through loans (high confidence). Different challenges 
to accessing capital markets associated with wealthy and poorer 
cities are compounded into three main issues: (i) scarcity and access 
of financial resources (Bahl and Linn 2014; Colenbrander et al. 2018b; 
Cook and Chu 2018; Gorelick 2018); (ii) the level of implication from 
the existing distributional uncertainties to the current financing of 
infrastructural decarbonisation across carbon markets (Silver 2015); 
and (iii) the policy and jurisdictional ambiguity in urban public 
finance institutions (Padigala and Kraleti 2014; Cook and Chu 2018). 
In poorer cities, these differing features continue to be inhibited by 
contextual characteristics of subnational finance, including gaps in 
domestic and foreign capital (Meltzer 2016), the mismatch between 
investment needs and available finance (Gorelick 2018), weak 
financial autonomy, insufficient financial maturity, investment-grade 
credit ratings in local debt markets (Bahl and Linn 2014), scarce 
diversified funding sources and stakeholders (Gorelick 2018; Zhan 
et al. 2018; Zhan and de Jong 2018) and weak enabling environments 
(Granoff et al. 2016).
The depth and character of the local capital market also affect 
cities differently in generating bonds (high confidence). Challenges 
institutional arrangements, the issues of minimum size, and high 
transaction costs associated with green bonds (Banga 2019). 
Green projects and project pipelines are generally smaller in scale 
feasible for a bond market transaction (Saha and D’Almeida 2017; 
DFID 2020). De-risking in the different phases of long-term project 
financing can be promoted to improve the appetite of capital markets 
(Section in 15.6.7).
Climate investment and finance for communities. There is 
insufficient evidence about which financing schemes contribute 
to climate change mitigation and adaptations at community level 
(high confidence). There is growing interest in the linkages between 
microfinance and adaptation in the agriculture sector (Agrawala and 
Carraro 2010; Fenton et al. 2015; Chirambo 2016; CIF 2018; Dowla 
2018), the finance for community-based adaptation actions (Fenton 
et al. 2014; Sharma et al. 2014), and the relations between remittances 
and adaptation (Le De et al. 2013). However, there is less discussion 
on community finance aside from the benefits of community finance 
and village funds in contributing to close investment gaps and 
community-based mitigation in the renewable energy and forest 
sectors (Ebers Broughel and Hampl 2018; Bauwens 2019; Watts et al. 
2019) The full potential and barriers of the community finance model 
are still unknown and research needs to expand understanding of 
favourable policy environments for community finance (Bauwens 
2019; Watts et al. 2019).
Implications for the transformation pathway. Cities often have 
capacity constraints on planning and preparing capital investment 
plans. Integrated urban capital investment planning is an option 
to develop cross-sectoral solutions that reduce investment needs, 
boost coordination capacity, and increase climate-smart impacts 
(high confidence) (Negreiros et  al. 2021). In countries with weak 
and poorly functioning intergovernmental systems, alliances and 
networks may influence their organisational ability to translate 
adaptive capacity for transformation into actions (Leck and Roberts 
2015; Colenbrander et  al. 2018a). Deepening understanding of 
country-specific enabling environment for mobilising urban climate 
finance among and within cities and communities, design of policy, 
institutional practices and intergovernmental systems are needed to 
reduce negative implications of transformation (Steele et al. 2015).
15.6.6 Innovative Financial Products
Innovative financial products with increased transparency on 
climate risk have attracted investor demand, and can facilitate 
investor identification of low-carbon investments (high confidence). 
Innovative products may not necessarily increase financial flows 
for climate solutions in the near term, however they can help build 
capacity on climate risk and opportunities within institutions and 
companies to pave the way for increased flows over time.
Investor demand is driving developments in innovative 
financial products (high confidence). Since AR5, innovative 
financial products such as sustainability and green-labelled financial 
products have proliferated (Section 15.3). These financial products are not necessarily ‘new’ in terms of financial design but are 
packaged or labelled in an innovative way to attract responsible and 
impact-oriented institutional investors.
The growth and diversity of the green bond market illustrates how 
innovative financial products can attract both public and private 
investors (high confidence). Demand for green financial products 
initially stemmed from public sector pension funds. Pension funds and 
insurance companies in OECD countries have traditionally favoured 
bonds as an asset class with lower risk (OECD and Bloomberg 2015).
Since AR5, labelled green bonds have grown significantly, exceeding 
USD290 billion issued in 2020 with a  total of USD1.1 trillion in 
outstanding bonds (CBI 2021a) (Section 15.6.7). Corporates, financial 
institutions and government-backed entities (for example in real 
estate, retail, manufacturing, energy utilities) issued the largest 
volumes, with use of proceeds focused primarily on GHG mitigation 
in energy, buildings and transport projects (CBI 2021a). Given 
their focus on GHG mitigation, green bonds are also sometimes 
referred to as climate bonds, but the common market terminology 
is ‘green’. Municipal green bond issuance has also been growing 
(Section  15.6.7). Beyond green bonds, additional products such as 
green loans, green commercial paper, green initial public offerings 
(IPOs), green commodities, and sustainability-linked bonds and loans 
have also been introduced in the market (CBI 2019a) (Section 15.6.7).
Investor demand for green bonds is evidenced by over-subscription 
of deals. Recent studies indicate an over-subscription for green-
labelled bonds by an average of between three and five times, as 
compared to non-labelled bonds (Gore and Berrospi 2019; Nauman 
2020). Results of a  survey of global treasurers showed a  higher 
demand for green bonds than non-labelled bonds for 70% of the 
respondents (CBI 2020a).
The financial crisis associated with COVID-19 has put increased 
pressure on debt issuers, and the extent to which the increase in 
indebtedness for sovereigns and corporates has been financed via 
climate-related-labelled debt products is not known. Further, at this 
time there is no identified literature assessing the degree to which 
international versus domestic investors are financing sovereign 
green debt in developing countries (Section 15.6.7) However, since 
the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, continued steady growth in issuance 
has been observed broadly across sustainable bonds (including 
green, social and sustainability bonds), with more significant growth 
in social bonds to support the COVID-19 recovery (Maltais and 
Nykvist 2020; CBI 2021a).
Index providers and exchanges can also play a  supporting role in 
transparency for identification of benchmarks and innovative financial 
products for climate action. Low-carbon indices have proliferated in 
recent years, with varying approaches including reduced exposure 
to fossil, best-in-class performers within a sector, and fossil-free (UN 
PRI 2018) (see discussion on ESG index performance that follows 
in this section). Indices can provide transparency on low-carbon 
opportunities, making it simpler for funds and investors to identify 
green investment options. Exchanges can also play a  supporting 
role to the uptake of green financial products through transparent 
The number of green or sustainability bond listing segments tripled 
from five in 2016 to 15 in 2018 (SSE 2018). Green security listings 
can also be used to enhance local capital markets (Section 15.6.7).
Significant potential exists for continued growth in innovative 
financial products, though some challenges remain (high 
confidence). Despite recent growth and diversification, green bonds 
face several challenges in scaling up. Issuance of green-labelled 
bonds constitutes approximately 1% of the global bond market 
issuance (ICMA 2020b; CBI 2021a) Potential exists to increase 
issuance amongst corporates, for instance, and across a  broader 
regional scope (although subject to limitations of local capital 
markets). Yet there remain several challenges to growing the green 
bond market, including inter alia concerns about greenwashing and 
limitations in application to developing countries (Shishlov et  al. 
2018; Banga 2019).
There is no globally accepted definition of green bonds, and varied 
definitions of eligible green activities are evolving across regional 
bond markets. Beyond the most commonly used green label, other 
related labels such as blue, sustainable, transition, sustainable 
development goal (SDG), social and environmental, social and 
governance (ESG) have some overlapping applications (Schumacher 
2020). The degree to which these labels represent climate-relevant 
investments depends on underlying criteria and how they are applied 
(Section 15.6.4).
There are several initiatives aimed at protecting the integrity of 
the green label. Guidance on use and management of proceeds 
established by the International Capital Markets Association’s 
Green Bond Principles (GBP) is followed on a voluntary basis, which 
notes eligible use of proceeds as primarily climate mitigation and 
adaptation projects. The GBP also recommend independent external 
reviews at the time of issuance, with 89% of green bond issuers in 

In addition to best practice based on voluntary principles, a further 
check on greenwashing, although insufficient on its own, is the fear 
of reputation risk on behalf of investors, issuers and intermediaries in 
the age of social media (Hoepner et al. 2017; Deschryver and de Mariz 
2020). A report on post-issuance green bond impact reporting notes 
that despite concerns (Shishlov et al. 2018), greenwashing incidence 
is rare, with 77% of green bond issuers reporting on allocation and 
59% reporting on impact, but with significant variance in quality and 
consistency of impact reporting (CBI 2021b).
Financial disclosure regulatory developments can help further 
align and specify definitions of green in the financial sector but are 
not a  substitute for climate policy (high confidence). Developing 
a common basis for understanding a green label could further reduce 
uncertainty or concerns of greenwashing. Regulatory developments in 
some regions seek to further guard against greenwashing with more 
specific definitions. The EU sustainable finance package, including 
the EU Taxonomy and EU Green Bond Standard draft regulations, is 
the broadest reaching, but not the only, regional initiative focused on 
disclosure of climate risk (Section 15.6.3). Taxonomies across regions 
are not always aligned on what can constitute a  green project, for example with respect to transition activities (Pfaff et  al. 2021) 
(Section 15.6.7). While standardisation can help reduce uncertainty 
in markets with imperfect knowledge, the green bond market is 
currently developing and is expected to continue to reflect regional 
differences in economic governance approaches (Nedopil et al. 2021). 
Regulations may also have trade-offs in terms of transaction costs for 
green financial product issuers. Classification approaches can also 
face challenges, depending on how they are designed, in their ability 
to capture new technologies and social impacts (Section 15.4).
Green bonds have been primarily targeting climate mitigation projects, 
with far fewer projects identified as adaptation. Green bonds mainly 
finance projects in the energy, buildings and transportation sectors, 
which constituted 85% of the use of proceeds of green bonds in 

adaptation projects, have been less suited to be financed in a bond 
structure, which could be in part due to the more dispersed and 
smaller nature of the projects and in part due to project ‘bankability’ 
or ability to contribute steady streams of financing to pay back the 
terms of a bond. However, adaptation projects may not be identified 
as such as resiliency becomes more mainstreamed into infrastructure 
planning (Section 15.3.2).
While green bonds have the potential to further support financial 
flows to developing countries, local capital markets can be at varying 
stages of development (Banga 2019) (Sections 15.6.2 and 15.6.7). 
While multilateral and bilateral development finance institutions 
have been active in the green bond market, global issuance in 

(CBI 2021a). Targeting international investors can be enhanced via  
de-risking activities (15.6.4).
Identifying green financial products can increase uptake and 
may result in a lower cost of capital in certain parts of the 
market (high confidence). Investors face a systematic underpricing 
of climate risk in financial markets (Krogstrup and Oman 2019; 
Kumar et al. 2019). Transparent identification of financial products 
can make it easier for investors to include low-carbon products in 
their portfolios. Investors with mandates that include or are focused 
on climate change are showing an interest in green-labelled financial 
products. Investors that identify themselves as green constitute 
approximately 53% of the investor base for green bonds in the first 
half of 2019 (CBI 2019b).
There is some evidence of a  premium, or an acceptance of lower 
yields by the investor, for green bonds (medium confidence). A survey 
of recent literature finds some consensus of the existence of a green 
premium in 56% of the studies on the primary markets (with 
a  wide variance of premium amount), and 70% of the studies on 
the secondary market (with an average premium of –1 to –9 basis 
points), particularly for government issued, investment grade and 
green bonds that follow defined governance and reporting practices 
(MacAskill et al. 2021). In the US municipal bond market, as credit 
quality for green-labelled bonds has increased in the past few years, 
some studies show a  positive premium for green bonds is arising 
(Baker et  al. 2018; Karpf and Mandel 2018), or appearing only in 
the secondary market (Partridge and Medda 2020), while others 
2020). Several studies also show a recent emergence of a premium 
and oversubscription for some green-labelled bonds denominated in 
EUR (CBI 2019b), in some cases for both USD or EUR green bonds 
(Ehlers and Packer 2017), with a wide variation in the range of the 
observed difference in basis points focusing on the secondary market 
(Gianfrate and Peri 2019; Nanayakkara and Colombage 2019; Zerbib 
2019), with financial institution and corporate green bonds exhibiting 
a  marginal premium compared with their non-green comparisons 
(Hachenberg and Schiereck 2018; Kempa et al. 2021).
Spillover effects of green bonds may also impact equity markets and 
other financing conditions. Stock prices have been shown to positively 
respond to green bond issuance (Tang and Zhang 2020). One study 
linked enhanced credit quality induced by issuing green-labelled 
bonds to a lower cost of capital for corporate issuers (Agliardi and 
Agliardi 2019). Issuers’ reputation and use of third-party verification 
can also improve financing conditions for green bonds (Bachelet 
et al. 2019). Green bonds are strongly dependent on fixed income 
market movements and are impacted by significant price spillover 
from the corporate and treasury bond markets (Reboredo 2018). 
A simulation of future green sovereign bond issuances shows that 
this can promote green finance via firm’s expectations and the credit 
market (Monasterolo and Raberto 2018).
Financial flows via these instruments have limited measurable 
environmental impact to date, however they can support 
capacity building on climate risk and opportunities within 
institutions to realise future impacts (high confidence). There 
is a  lack of evidence to date that green and sustainable financial 
products have significant impacts in terms of climate change 
mitigation and adaptation Box 15.7). Further, new products must be 
coupled with tightened climate policy and a reduction in investments 
associated with GHG-emitting activities to make a difference on the 
climate (Section 15.3.3.2).
It is challenging to link specific emission reductions with specific 
instruments that mainly target climate activities such as green bonds. Data challenges point to an inability to link emission reductions, 
including Scope 3 GHG emissions, at the organisation or firm level 
with green bond use-of-proceeds issuance (Ehlers et  al. 2020; 
Tuhkanen and Vulturius 2020). However one study found evidence 
of a  signalling effect of issuing green bonds resulting in emission 
reductions at the corporate level following issuance (Flammer 2020), 
and another study characterised the lifecycle emissions of renewable 
energy financed by green bonds, indicating potentially substantive 
avoided emissions but with variance up to a  factor of 12 across 
bonds depending on underlying assumptions (Gibon et  al. 2020). 
There is also a lack of impact reporting requirements and consistency 
in the green bond market. Impact reporting is not typically required 
for green bond listings on specific exchanges, nor are there any 
requirements for independent reviews of impact reporting, however 
this could change in future if investors apply pressure.
Green-labelled products may not necessarily result in increased 
financial flows to climate projects, although there can be benefits 
from capacity building with issuing institutions. Green bonds 
can be used  to finance new climate projects or refinance existing 
climate  projects, and thus do not necessarily result in finance 
for new  climate projects constituting additional GHG reductions 
(a framing used in the Clean Development Mechanism). The labelling 
process itself may not necessarily lead to additional financing (Dupre 
et al. 2018; Nicol et al. 2018b). However, the labelling process has 
merit in contributing to building capacity within issuing institutions 
on climate change (Schneeweiss 2019), which could support 
identification of new green projects in the pipeline.
Climate risk disclosure initiatives, some of which are voluntary in nature, 
may have a limited direct climate impact. Transparency on climate risk 
may not change investor decisions nor result in divestment, especially 
in the emerging economies, as support and clear direction from 
regulatory and policy mechanisms are required to drive institutional 
investors at large (Ameli et  al. 2021b). On the other hand, there is 
evidence of reduced fossil fuel investments following mandatory 
climate risk disclosure requirements, indicating a  broader signalling 
effect of transparency (Mésonnier and Nguyen 2021).  
Box 15.7 | Impact of ESG and Sustainable Finance Products and Strategies
While scaling up climate finance remains a challenge (Section 15.3.2), there is consensus that investments that are managed taking 
into account broader sustainability criteria have increased consistently and ESG integration into sustainable investment is increasingly 
being mainstreamed by the financial sector over recent years (Maiti 2021). The United Nations Principles for Responsible Investment 
(PRI) grew to over 3000 signatories in 2020, representing over USD100 trillion in assets under management (UN PRI 2020). And 
according to the 2018 biennial assessment by Global Sustainable Investment Alliance,15 sustainable investments in five major 
developed economies grew by 34% in the two-year period following the 2016 assessment. The primary ESG approaches leveraged 
were exclusion criteria and ESG integration, which together amounted to over USD37 trillion, accounting for two-thirds of the assessed 
sustainable investments, with novel strategies such as best-in class screening and sustainability-themed investing showing significant 
growth, although together they accounted for around 6% of these investments (GSIA 2019). Shareholder activism or corporate 
engagement is the other key approach, which has been well established and continued to grow to nearly USD10 trillion (GSIA 2019).

2020). When it comes to the tangible impact of the financial sector on addressing climate change and sustainable development, there 
remains ambiguity. There is a growing need for more robust assessment of ESG scores, including establishing higher standardisation of 
scoring processes and a common understanding of the different ESG criteria and their tangible impact on addressing climate change. 
The issue was highlighted in an assessment of six of the leading ESG rating agencies’ company ratings under the MIT Aggregate 
Confusion Project, which found the correlation among them to be 0.61, leading them to conclude that available ESG data was ‘noisy 
and unreliable’ (Berg et al. 2020). This need is reaffirmed by Drempetic et al. (2020), who claim that a thorough investigation of ESG 
scores remains a relatively neglected topic, with extraneous factors, such as firm size, influencing the score (Drempetic et al. 2020).
There continues to be a research gap in assessing the direct impact of ESG and sustainable investments on climate change indicators, 
with most existing studies assessing the co-relation between either the factors driving the sustainable finance trends and the impact 
on sustainable investments, or sustainable investments and the impact on corporate financial performance. Nevertheless, since 
the post-SDG adoption period, there has been a notable uptake on research linking sustainable business practices and financial 
performance (Muhmad and Muhamad 2020). This research shows that there is a  growing business case for ESG investing, with 
evidence increasingly indicating a non-negative co-relation between ESG, SDG adoption and corporate financial performance (Friede 
et al. 2015; Muhmad and Muhamad 2020), and ESG performance having a positive relation with stock returns (Consolandi et al. 
2020). Research focused on developed economies also indicates towards a positive relation between ESG criteria and disclosure, and 
economic sustainability of a firm (Giese et al. 2019; Alsayegh et al. 2020) and allays investor fears by showing that sustainable finance 
initiatives, such as divestment, do not adversely impact investment portfolio performance (Henriques and Sadorsky 2018; Trinks et al. 
2018). It should be reiterated that this research assesses the co-relation between ESG criteria and corporate financial performance, 
with the researchers in some cases, such as Friede et al. (2015), including disclaimers of the results being inconclusive and highlighting 
the need for a deeper assessment for linking ESG criteria with impact on financial performance.
On the other hand, there is growing evidence for a sustainable investment lens having a broader positive impact on creating an 
enabling environment and strengthening the case for such investments. For instance, corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities 
and investments on the environment dimension, specifically in the areas of emission and resource reduction, were found to be 
profitable and a predictor of future abnormal returns in the longer term, from additional cash flow and additional demand (Dorfleitner 
et al. 2018). These factors could be contributing to the increasing trend of sustainable and green investments, and can be said to be 
further reiterated by the spate of investor-led collaborative initiatives and recent announcements by leading finance institutes in the 
developed economies, which is well recorded in a range of recent grey literature, including new climate-aligned investment strategies 
and ambition towards net zero targets.
Yet there is also a risk of companies announcing projected sustainability or net zero targets and claiming the associated positive 
reputational impact, while having no clear action plan in place to achieve these. The lack of mandatory reporting frameworks, which 
results in an over-reliance on self-reported carbon data by companies for ESG assessments, can be a primary contributor (In and 
Schumacher 2021).
While there is a lack of research on the impact of sustainable finance products, divestment impact has been assessed in more detail. 
Although the research here also points towards the ambiguous direct impact of divestment on reducing GHG emissions or on the 
financial performance of fossil fuel companies, its indirect impact on framing the narrative around sustainable finance decisions 
(Bergman 2018), and the inherent potential of the divestment movement for building awareness and mobilising broader public support 
for effective climate policies, have been better researched and could be considered to be the more relevant outcomes (Braungardt 
et al. 2019). Arguments against divestment point to its largely symbolic nature, but Braungardt et al. (2019) elaborate on the broader 
positive impacts of divestment, which include its ability to spur climate action as a moral imperative and stigmatise and reduce the 
power of the fossil fuel lobby, and the potential of the approach to mitigate systemic financial risks arising due to climate change and 
address the legal responsibilities of investors merging in this regard.
Challenges remain with regards to overlapping definitions of sustainable and ESG investment opportunities, which also vary 
depending on social norms and pathways. There is also a general need for more extensive ESG disclosure at a corporate level, against 
the background of emerging mandatory impact reporting for asset managers in some regions. A  movement is building towards 
sustainable investment strategies and increased sustainable development awareness in the financial sector (Muhmad and Muhamad 
2020; Maiti 2021), which points to the ability of civil society movements, such as divestment campaigns, to have some influence on 
investor behaviour, although there are other influences such as climate risk disclosure initiatives and regulations.Box 15.7 (continued)
International situational context. Developing countries make 
up two-thirds of the world’s population and carry carbon-intensive 
economies where 70% of investments (see Chapter  3) need to be 
conducted to limit warming to 2°C. The focus for climate investments 
has been on China, USA, Europe, India and the G20 (UNEP 2019) 
but studies highlight Paris and SDG attention should be devoted to 
Africa, LDCs and SIDS (African Union Commission 2015; Feindouno et al. 
2020; GCA-AAI 2020; Warner 2020; AOSIS 2021). The ‘special needs, 
circumstances and vulnerability’ of African, LDC and SIDS nations are 
recognised under UNFCCC and UN agreements (UN 2009, 2015a,b,c; 
UNFCCC 2010, 2015; Pauw et  al. 2019). These nations currently 
contribute very little to global emissions. Developing countries with their 
growing economies, including the vast African continent roughly the 
size of China, Europe, USA, and India combined (IEA 2014b, p. 20) with 
a 1 billion population expected to double by 2050, growing reliance on 
fossil fuels and ‘cheap’ biomass (charcoal use and deforestation) amid 
rising urbanisation and industrialisation ambitions – collectively these 
nations hold large leap-frog potential for the energy transition as well 
as risks of infrastructure lock-in. Accelerated international cooperation 
is a critical enabler (IPCC 2018) in recognising this potential. This could 
mobilise global savings, scale up development of local capital markets 
for accelerated low-carbon investment and adaptation in low- and 
lower-middle-income countries as well as tackle illicit finance including 
tax avoidance leakages that deprive developing countries of valuable 
resources (US DoJ 2009; Hearson 2014; Hanlon 2017; US DoJ 2019; 
IATFD 2021). Diversifying funding sources is important at a time hard-
currency Eurobond issuances reach records (Panizza and Taddei 2020; 
Moody’s Investors Service 2021). Otherwise, the structure of voluntary, 
nationally oriented, and financially fragmented arrangements under 
the Paris Agreement (Chapter 17) could lead to ‘regional rivalry’ (SSP 3) 
pathways (IPCC 2018; Gazzotti et al. 2021). The benefits are many times 
greater than apparent costs in terms of expected decline in global GHG 
emissions and attaining SDGs. These could even generate large ‘win-
win’ opportunities back in capital source countries which will benefit 
from a flow back in import demand (Hourcade et al. 2021a).
Lessons from literature on policy options in mobilising capital 
for Paris and SDGs in developing countries can be summarised 
as follows: 
1. development of national just transition strategies meet the 
USD100 billion commitment on a  grant-equivalent basis to 
support NDCs that integrate policies on COVID-19 recovery, 
climate action, sustainable development and equity; 
2. increase the leverage of public funds on diverse sources of 
private capital through de-risking investments and public-private 
partnerships involving location-based entities with AAA-rated 
players and institutional investors; 
3. coordination of project preparation and development of project 
pipelines by infrastructure coordinator agencies, one-stop 
structuring and financing shops, project risk facilities provided 
by entities such as cities’ development banks, green banks, 
a world climate bank, global guarantee mechanism, and global 
infrastructure investment platform;4. development of local currency bond markets backed by cross-
border guarantees, technical assistance, remediation assets, 
especially by regional and national players whose mandates 
include nurturing local capital markets to support bond yield 
curve development and exchange listing options;
5. adopting advances in science-based assessment methods to 
foster accountability; 
(a) for project assessment, measuring, reporting and verifying, 
and certification,
(b) for disclosures in climate, fossil fuels, SDGs, debt transparency 
and debt sustainability, and 
(c) for progress on UN systems of national accounts particularly 
for public sector finance statistics.
Whole-of-society approach to mobilising diverse capital. There’s 
no shortage of money globally: it is simply that it has yet to travel 
to where it’s most needed. One challenge is unlocking unencumbered 
endowments to contribute to Paris and SDGs (high confidence) . 
The aggregate global wealth figures exceed USD200 trillion (Davies 
et al. 2016; UBS 2017; Credit Suisse 2020; Heredia et al. 2020). Some 
developing countries have run pilots for investing in government 
bonds capitalising on fintech growth discussed (The Economist 2017; 
Akwagyiram and Ohuocha 2021) (Section 15.6.6). Others are developing 
green products to encourage uptake by middle class retail investors 
(Eurosif 2018; UK DMO 2021). Millennial-aged inheritors expected to 
receive intergenerational transfers mobilised by global citizen activism 
(Chapter 2) invest in green retail and tech products (Morgan Stanley 
2017; UBS 2017; Capgemini 2021). Historic inequity and diaspora-
related private and public resources pledged and debated during 
the COVID-19 pandemic might have potential to contribute towards 
Paris and SDGs (Olusoga 2015; Glueck and Friedman 2020; Hall 2020; 
Piketty 2020; Timsit 2020; Goldman Sachs 2021; Guthrie 2021; Mieu 
2021; Wagner 2021). Philanthropic institutions use grants, debt, equity, 
guarantees and issue investment grade bonds in using unencumbered 
endowments (Manilla 2018; Covington 2020; Moody’s Investors 
Service 2020) but only about 2% of their resources are dedicated to 
climate action (Williams T., 2015; Kramer 2017; Morena 2018; Delanoë 
et al. 2021). The pandemic exemplified the unprecedented collaboration 
and mobilisation of multilateral and scientific communities supported 
by the COVAX risk sharing mechanism for COVID-19 vaccines with 
pooling of financial and scientific resources (OECD 2021d). This 
momentum in international cooperation can be harnessed to galvanise 
resources, including for teaching of sciences in developing countries 
important in tackling society challenges, alleviating poverty (TWAS 
2021) and inequity legacies compounded by climate impacts debated 
by many (Henochsberg 2016; Obregon 2018; Fernandez et al. 2021; 
The Economist 2021). Suggestions towards equitable models include 
‘global adaptation funding approaches’ (Chancel and Piketty 2015), 
a ‘world climate bank’ to finance climate investments through long-
term bonds (Foley 2009; Broome 2012; Broome and Foley 2016), 
a ‘cities development bank’ (Alexander et al. 2019), and ‘public debt 
financing models’ (Rendall 2021) for generations to share the burden 
which has precedence in history (Draper 2007; Fowler 2015).
could benefit from technical assistance and partnership to 
scale up their potential with institutional investors better 
mobilised (high confidence). The Global South has some 260 public 
development banks/PDBs representing USD5 trillion in assets with 
a worldwide PDB capacity to provide more than USD400 billion yr–1 
of climate finance (IDFC and GCF 2020). Case studies discuss the 
potential for diaspora bond issuance being deployed for climate 
investments including securitisation of remittances as collateral 
for infrastructure bonds (Ketkar and Ratha 2010; Akkoyunlu and 
Stern 2012; Gelb et al. 2021). Such instruments could help harness 
diaspora remittances, whose flows rose from under USD 100 billion 
to USD530 billion during 1990–2018 (World Bank 2019c). PDBs could 
benefit from technical partnership with multilaterals and other local 
banks (Torres and Zeidan 2016). Their knowledge of local markets, can 
help build project pipelines (Figure 15.7) to channel local, domestic 
and international capital (Griffith-Jones et  al. 2020). Institutional 
domestic and international investors have growing assets estimated 
to exceed USD100 trillion (high confidence) (Willis Towers Watson 
2020; UN PRI 2020; Halland et al. 2021; Heredia et al. 2021; Inderst 
2021) and could be better mobilised. Some 36% of total assets under 
management (AUM) by the 100 largest asset owners come from 
pensions and sovereign wealth funds in the Asia Pacific region, with 
the remainder split almost evenly across Europe, the Middle East, 
Africa and North America. The largest pension fund in South Africa 
held about USD130 billion AUM in 2019 and African institutional 
investors held USD1.8 trillion in 2020 (PwC 2015; GEPF 2019; Bagus 
et al. 2020; GCA 2021a). UK NGO War on Want’s (2016) analysis of 

estimates these as holding USD1 trillion assets inside Africa. The 
Latin America and Caribbean region holds just about USD1 trillion 
AUM (Curtis 2016; Serebrisky et al. 2015; Cavallo and Powell 2019).
Investors with accumulated private capital are reported as 
looking for climate investments to ensure Just Transition, 
alignment with Paris and SDGs. However, progress remains 
pilot, slow and piecemeal (high confidence). Global investors 
have published statements on their possible contribution, with 
recommendations to governments on de-risking to accelerate private 
sector investment to support Paris-aligned NDCs in developing 
countries (IIGCC 2015; IIGCC 2017; Global Investor Statement 
2018; IIGCC 2018; Global Investor Statement 2019; IIGCC 2020). 
In March 2020, the UN Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), 
had 3038 members representing USD103 trillion (UN PRI 2020); 
another coalition of investors published COVID-19 recovery plans 
(Investor Agenda 2020) and the Net Zero Asset Managers initiative 
was launched in December 2020 (NZAM 2020). However, it is still 
unclear how these pronouncements will be transformed to adequate 
financial flows and volumes of investment pipelines (IEA 2021d) 
(Chapter  3). Rempel and Gupta (2020) posit that a  proportion of 
institutional holding is in fossil fuels. Clean energy transition minerals 
raise ESG questions around inclusive development for indigenous 
populations and require changes to supply chains exploiting child 
labour (Herrington 2021; IEA 2021a; IEA 2021f).
Options to mobilise institutional investors currently remain small 
pilots, relative to Paris and SDG ambitions (high confidence). In terms of examples: in the women of colour-led arena, a Chicago pension 
fund invested in a developing country using a  private equity fund; 
(Langhorne 2021, USAID 2021). Institutional BlackRock’s blended 
finance vehicle with OECD MDB partners focuses on developing 
countries (BlackRock 2021). In regional AAA MDB partnerships, the 
African Development Bank (AfDB) collaborates with African nations 
through a  regional infrastructure fund (Africa50 2019); the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) collaborates with a  Philippines state-
owned pension fund and Dutch pension fund in using a  private equity 
fund to catalyse private sector investment (ADB 2012). A UN entity 
with several pooled public-private investment platforms includes an 
SDG blended finance vehicle (UN CDF 2020a; 2020b). A multilateral 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) blended finance fund, 
supported by a  sovereign guarantee from Sweden’s SIDA, and 
separately a  USD1 billion green bond fund by IFC and Europe’s 
Amundi asset manager buy green securities issued by developing 
country banks financing local currency climate investments (IFC 2018, 
2021; Amundi and IFC 2019). The key parameter is the investment 
multiplier, the ratio of private investment mobilised by a  given 
amount of public funds which varies by product type. IFC’s portfolio 
of blended finance investments point to a self-reported range of 3 to 

finance provided on concessional terms (IFC 2021a). Although an 
AAA-rated IFC blended finance fund was established in 2013, most 
investors joined in 2017 with insurers AXA and Swiss Re investing 
USD500 million each to bring the fund to USD7 billion raised 
from eight global investors (Attridge and Gouett 2021). Critics of 
blended finance mechanisms point to lack of data transparency 
hampering independent assessment on (i) value for public money 
and costs of blending versus other financial mechanisms, (ii) risks 
and benefits of de-risking private capital to collateralising climate-
vulnerable Global South populations, (iii) lack of partnership with 
local players, and (iv) complex structures (Akyüz 2017; Mawdsley 
2018; Convergence 2020; Attridge and Gouett 2021; Gabor 2021). 
Whilst blended finance transactions (BFTF 2018) are quite common 
in mature regulated markets with mandatory reporting requirements 
(Morse 2015; ICAEW 2021), the additional finance mobilised and 
their developmental impact remain unknown due to poor reporting 
that hammpers evidence-based policy making (Attridge and Gouett 
2021). Projects that are aligned with blended finance principles in 
the UN Addis Agenda (UN 2015a), and take account of local contexts 
by partnering with local actors, are much more likely to have 
sustainable impacts.
De-risking tools to lower capital costs and mobilise diverse 
investors. Paris-aligned NDCs that integrate policies on COVID-19 
pandemic recovery, climate action, sustainable development, just 
transition and equity can harness co-benefits including contribution 
to Invisible UN SDG 7  energy poverty sectors (high confidence). 
Developing countries require access to affordable finance for projects 
ranging from clean cooking solutions (Accenture 2018; World Bank 
et  al. 2021); decentralised energy systems, intra-country power 
stations and regionally shared power pools with their associated 
energy distribution networks (IEA 2020d; IRENA 2020c). Close 
to 3 billion people in Africa and developing Asia have no access to 
clean cooking. For sub-Saharan Africa, the acute lack of electricity 
access lags behind all regions on SDG 7 indicators, impacting mostly 
ESMAP 2020; Zhang 2021) (Box  6.1). These dire statistics remind 
of compounding tensions: historical inequities and the associated 
‘first comer’ exploiting African resources for development elsewhere, 
the local climate change, ‘latecomer’ capacity development and 
technology transfer challenges, illicit mining finance and stranded 
assets (Curtis 2016; Bos and Gupta 2019; UNU-INRA 2019; Arezki 
2021). The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbates this tension with 
more people pushed below the poverty line (Sumner et  al. 2020) 
(section 15.6.4, Box 15.6 on post-COVID). Recent analysis points to 
the 60 largest banks providing USD3.8 trillion to fossil fuel companies 
since 2016, including inside Africa (Rainforest Action Network et al. 
2021). IMF estimated fossil fuel subsidies totalling USD5.2 trillion or 
6.5% of global GDP in 2017 (Coady et al. 2019) to be compared with 
the USD2.4 trillion yr–1 energy investments over the next decade to 
limit global warming to 1.5°C (IPCC 2018). Analysts point to models 
in improvements to resources husbandry that include (i) developing 
strong minerals sector governance through sovereign wealth funds 
for domestic development (Wills et al. 2016) and (ii) compensation for 
Africa (Walsh et al. 2021) leaving fossil fuels underground (McGlade 
and Ekins 2015) in the Just Transition (Section  15.2.4) and Right 
to Develop debates as assets continue to be mined (IEA 2019c). In 
many developing regions, some of the world’s best renewable energy 
sources remain out of reach due to high costs which can be up to 
seven times those in developed countries (IEA 2021d). Shifting some 
risks through financial de-risking approaches could be instrumental (Schmidt 2014; Sweerts et al. 2019; Drumheller et al. 2020; Matthäus 
and Mehling 2020).
Combining approaches: (i) developed countries meeting 
UNFCCC USD100 billion commitment on a  grant-equivalent 
basis, (ii) stepped up technical assistance, (iii) infrastructure 
coordination, (iv) knowledge sharing by project preparation 
entities, and (iv) harnessing project risk facilities such as 
guarantees could be instrumental for scaling climate finance 
for Paris-SDGs (high confidence). Figure 15.7 illustrates the interplay 
between infrastructure project financing phases, bond refinancing 
and opportunities for developing bond yield curve benchmarks in 
nurturing local capital markets and mobilising diverse investors. 
These project financing phases have varying risk-return profiles 
and different benchmarks to track performance are often required 
by investors for different securities that might be created (Ketterer 
and Powell 2018).
An ODI (2018) survey of private and public project preparation facilities 
internationally showed high failure rates in early project preparation 
phases with recommendations on ‘one-stop-shops’ and knowledge 
sharing on effective approaches. During the very high-risk concept 
phase (Figure  15.7)  – grants and technical assistance de-risk with 
design concepts, project proposals and feasibility studies completed 
to ‘kick-start’ the right projects. The early-stage developmental phase 
is characterised by short-term debt in the two to five years phase to 
ConceptEarly-stage
developmentAdvanced
developmentFinancial
close
ConstructionCOD
Commercial
operationFocus of most institutional investors
2–10% of project costs
Cost Progress Risk Gap
Figure 15.7 | Bond refinancing mobilises institutional investors in mature project phase.  De-risk early-stage infrastructure projects.  Source: adapted from 
PIDG (2019).
paid back by issuing bonds once the construction phase is completed. 
Such bond refinancing over say, 15–25 years, in the low-risk mature 
project phase can provide a lower cost of capital. Market-making to 
develop a pipeline of investment opportunities uses a complimentary 
mix of high-risk capital options in the form of grants, guarantees, 
equity, and mezzanine financing that can help (Attridge and Gouett 
2021): (i) reduce up-front risks in the early phases, (ii) allow banks to 
recycle loans to new projects, and (iii) galvanise multilateral technical 
assistance for building bond yield curve benchmarks and de-risking 
local currency bond issuance of long tenors such as green bonds/
resilience bonds (Berensmann et al. 2015; CBI 2015; Mercer 2018; 
Dasgupta et al. 2019; PIDG 2019; Braga et al. 2021; CBI et al. 2021; 
Hourcade et al. 2021a,b). Convergence (2019) points to investment 
from commercial banks with commercial debt of 11–15 years 
maturity being covered by guarantees. To achieve scale, some have 
issued special purpose vehicle (SPV) green infrastructure project 
bonds combining tenors up to 15 years with credit ratings assigned 
to mobilise investors with community trusts for local participation 
(Kaminker and Stewart 2012; Mathews and Kidney 2012; Mbeng 
Mezui and Hundal 2013; Essers et al. 2016; Moody’s Investors Service 
2016; Ng and Tao 2016; Harber 2017). Bond refinancing could be 
facilitated through standardised national infrastructure style bonds, 
national infrastructure funds (Amonya 2009; Ketterer and Powell 
2018) and country SPV infrastructure funds issuing bonds (Cavallo 
and Powell 2019) embedding MDBs.
Existing project risk facilities including guarantees could 
benefit from coordination, scaling and better reporting 
frameworks (high confidence). Individual and clubs of developed 
and developing countries currently provide public guarantees 
(ADB 2015, 2018; IIGCC 2015; Pereira Dos Santos 2018; GGGI 
2019; Garbacz et al. 2021). However MDB business models impose 
limitations on use of guarantees and collaboration with other MDBs 
(Gropp et al. 2014; Schiff and Dithrich 2017; Lee et al. 2018; Pereira 
dos Santos and Kearney 2018). Loans continue to dominate as the 
financial instrument of choice by MDBs and DFIs, with guarantees 
mobilising the most private finance for OECD reported data, even 
if their use remains limited (IATFD 2020; OECD 2020c; Attridge 
and Gouett 2021). Ramping up the use of guarantees to mobilise 
private investment raises questions around understanding efficacy 
in the design as there is no one size that fits all and more research 
is required to better understand this aspect (Convergence 2019). 
Sample guarantee forms in literature: (i) single-country Sweden and 
USA DFI forms (SIDA 2016, DCA 2018), (ii) multilateral institution 
offerings (Pereira Dos Santos 2018; IRENA 2020e), (iii) multi-
sovereign guarantees one-stop platforms such as those on the 
PIDG/GuarantCo (PIDG 2019) and Africa Guarantee Fund owned 
by DFIs, including the African Development Bank (AfDB), the French 
Development Agency (AFD), the Nordic Development Fund (NDF), 
and the KfW Development Bank (AGF 2020), (iv) MIGA, established 
to provide political risk guarantees (enhanced green MIGA) (Déau 
and Touati 2018), (v) multilateral partnerships with developing 
nations via infrastructure funds (Section  15.6.7.2) and green 
infrastructure options (de Gouvello and Zelenko 2010; Studart and 
Gallagher 2015), (vi) guarantees embedded in project risk facilities 
such as currency fund TCX established by 22 DFIs (TCX 2020), and (vii) ASEAN and African multi-sovereign regional local currency bond 
guarantee funds and a co-guarantee platform (GGGI 2019; Garbacz 
et al. 2021). Fossil fuels currently benefit from de-risking tools from 
export credit agencies (Lawrence and Archer 2021), with questions 
around sustainable development (Wright 2011); Gupta et al. (2020) 
argue that these could be deployed for renewable energy. Sample 
project facilities reflecting the diverse project types across developing 
country regions can include i) UNEP Seed Capital ii) C40 Cities Facility 
iii) Blue Natural Capital Facility (IUCN 2021); iv) Clean Cooking Fund 
(ESMAP 2021) v) opportunities for guarantees in LDCs (Garbacz et al. 
2021) vi) World Bank’s Renewables Risk Mitigation (GCF 2021) and 
World Bank’s Global Infrastructure Facility (GGGI 2019).. Multilaterals 
offer credit enhancement to manage both actual and perceived risks: 
in India’s corporate sector, renewable energy SPV project bonds 
have been guaranteed jointly by ADB and an infrastructure company 
raising the credit rating from sub-investment grade to investment 
grade to lower borrowing costs (ADB 2018; Agarwal and Singh 2018; 
Carrasco 2018).
Investment vehicles into green infrastructure come in various forms 
(high confidence) and can include indirect corporate investment such 
as bonds; semi-direct investment funds via pooled vehicles such as 
infrastructure funds and private equity funds and project investment 
(direct) in green projects through equity and debt including loans, 
project bonds and green bonds. For pension funds in Australia and 
Canada, direct investment in infrastructure is about 5% of total AUM 
(Inderst and Della Croce 2013) whilst less than 1% for OECD pension 
funds goes to green infrastructure (Kaminker et  al. 2013). Some 
regional developing country institutional investors use a variety of 
investment vehicles that span SPVs, private equity, domestic and 
regional local currency bond markets with statutory level mandates 
to address historic inequities (GEPF 2019). Cross-border collaboration 
in regional power markets such as Europe’s Nordpool; for developing 
countries could be led by repository of technical partnership from 
infrastructure funds and multilaterals (Oseni and Pollitt 2016; Juvonen 
et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020; Nordpool 2021). Barriers to investments 
include non-standardised investment vehicles of scale and lack 
of national infrastructure road maps to give investor confidence 
in government commitment. Some have set up infrastructure 
coordinating entities embedding local science and engineering R&D 
(IPA 2021; National Infrastructure Commission 2021). Arezki et  al. 
(2016) argue that coordination within existing platforms could create 
a  global infrastructure investment platform for de-risking through 
guarantees and securitisation; Matthäus and (Mehling (2020) point 
to a global guarantee mechanism. Such AAA multilateral approaches 
create credibility-enhancing effects in developing capital markets. 
Hourcade et al. (2021a) suggest that the overall economic efficiency 
could be higher with guarantees calibrated per tonne on an agreed 
‘social, economic, and environmental value of mitigation actions 
[and] their co-benefits’ (Article 108, Paris Agreement) basis, which 
would operate as a notional carbon price (High-Level Commission on 
Carbon Prices 2017). The grant equivalent of guarantees and induced 
equity inflows could be far beyond the USD100 billion promise. 
Such cooperative solutions in adopting development of local capital 
markets would end the drawbacks of the current plethora of low-
scale fragmented project-by-project and ‘special-purpose’ pilots 
and programmes.
in nascent markets. The G20 has an action plan to support 
strengthening local currency bond markets and development of local 
capital markets is also part of the option for financing UN SDGs in 
developing countries (UN 2015a, 2019, 2020; IATFD 2016, 2021). 
Primers are available on bond market development to support policy 
choices (World Bank and IMF 2001; Silva et  al. 2020; World Bank 
2020; Adrian et al 2021; IMF and World Bank 2021). Developing 
government bond yield curves with different maturities can be an 
important policy objective (high confidence). This can support pricing 
discovery, liquidity (Wooldridge 2001) and can be achieved through 
step by step tranches from shorter to longer maturities to boost 
confidence and encourage municipals and other quasi-sovereigns. 
Money market instruments (such as, green commercial paper) anchor 
the short end of the yield curve with bonds of varying maturity issued 
by sovereign/quasi-sovereign entities (national treasuries, SOEs, 
municipalities) to mobilise investors (Goodfriend 2011; LSEG 2018; 
Tolliver et al. 2019). A variety of bonds are being used for developing 
countries including green (Ketterer et  al. 2019), blue-water (Roth 
et  al. 2019), transition, SDG/social, biodiversity bonds (Aglionby 
2019), green/resilience bonds (AAC 2021); gender bonds (Andrade 
and Prado 2020) diaspora (LSEG 2017) and infrastructure project 
bonds (CBK 2021). Local policymakers would gain from technical 
and financial assistance in building green yield curves, for example 
with support from multilaterals (EIB 2012; IATFD 2016; Shi 2017; EIB 
2018; Impact Investing Institute 2021). Green bonds are one of the 
most readily accessible to help fund Paris goals (Tolliver et al. 2019; 
Tuhkanen and Vulturius 2020). Section 15.3.2 refers to the growth in 
labelled bond markets (CBI 2021a), low borrowing costs and yield 
curve building in Europe (Bahceli 2020; Serenelli 2021; Stubbington 
2021; UK DMO 2021). For developing countries, labelled bonds have 
mostly been in hard currency (e.g. Smith 2021) despite local currency 
markets making up more than 80% total debt stock (IMF and World 
Bank 2016; Silva et al. 2020; Adrian et al 2021; Inderst 2021). The 
labelled bonds issuance by multilaterals do not currently mobilise 
the trillion levels needed. Research studies show that participating 
in green bond markets in part depends on a country having credible 
NDCs (Tolliver et  al. 2020a; Tolliver et  al. 2020b) and highlights 
diverse approaches working together to support local bond market 
development (Amacker and Donovan 2021; ICMA 2021; IMF and 
World Bank 2021).
Technical assistance options would benefit from coordination. 
Labelled bond costs remain high. Developing countries 
are using fiscal incentives, grants, and guarantees to 
support nascent bond markets with most taxonomies under 
development (high confidence). Technical assistance requirements 
to improve the investment climate and bond market development 
will vary across national capacities. These would benefit from 
the USD100 billion UNFCCC grant equivalent basis to develop 
(i) regulatory and policy frameworks; (ii) UN national statistical 
systems (Singh et al. 2016; MacFeely and Barnat 2017; Paris21 2018; 
Bleeker and Abdulkadri 2020); (iii) credible NDC and SDG investment 
plans;  (iv) project assessment certification and taxonomies; (v) bond 
market guidelines; and (vi) public finance management (US DoJ 
2009; US DoJ 2019). Other technical assistance channels include 
diaspora entities, universities and learned societies (ICEAW 2012; UNFCCC 2021). LDCs supported by humanitarian entities are 
least likely to have active capital markets (ICRC 2020; IDFC 2020; 
Cao et al. 2021b). Clubs of LDCs are partnering with AAA MDBs in 
aggregation approaches (AfDB 2020; GCF 2020b). Some UN entities 
provide technical assistance on municipal aggregation of projects 
(UN CDF 2021a), with Africa, LDC, SIDS nations and cities accessing 
green technical facilities and listings for labelled bonds (C40 Cities 
Climate Leadership Group 2016; Gorelick 2018; Jackson 2019; FSD 
Africa and CBI 2020; Gorelick and Walmsley 2020; MoE Fiji 2020; IFC 
2021c). Elevated climate risks imperil developing country ability to 
repay debts (Schmidt 2014; Buhr et al. 2018; Volz et al. 2020; Dibley 
et al. 2021). To lower overall costs and achieve more, entities have 
accessed technical assistance, listed local currency labelled bonds, 
and used credit enhancing bond guarantees, regulatory treatments 
and philanthropy schemes (Europe 2020 Project Bond Initiative 2012; 
SBN 2018; Agliardi and Agliardi 2019; Banga 2019). In the regions, 
China issued guidelines for stock exchanges and regulatory support 
for green bonds (Cao and Ma 2021), India issued regulations for 
local issuance of green bonds (CBI 2019a), while in the Latin America 
and Caribbean region, both plain vanilla and labelled bonds use the 
same authority (Ketterer et al. 2019). African, LDC and SIDS nations 
are reviewing ways to harness local exchanges (SSE 2018; GCF 
2019; World Bank et al. 2021b; UN CDF 2021b). For taxonomies, the 
differences reflect the multitude of local Just Transition pathways, 
some with a  purely environmental focus and others incorporating 
livelihood improvements (ICMA 2021). The sustainable bond market 
has been expanding as transition bonds become listed in anticipation 
of future developments (Roos 2021).
Progress towards transparency using scientific-based methods 
to build trust and accountability. After 60 years of development 
finance, critics underline limits coming from i) multilaterals model, 
lack of transparency around aid and debt (Mkandawire 2010; Lee 
2017; PWYF 2019; Bradlow 2021; Gianfagna et  al. 2021) ii) illicit 
finance (Plank 1993; Sachs and Warner 2001; Hanlon 2016; US DoJ 
2019) ) iii) lack of developed country commitment to pledges (Nhamo 
and Nhamo 2016) iv) unregulated players as financial intermediaries 
in blended finance (Pereira 2017; Donaldson and Hawkes 2018; 
Attridge and Engen 2019; Tan 2019) v) weak accountability reflected 
in soft SDG data and vi) burden of responsibility in mobilising Paris 
and SDG resources to countries with historically soft institutional 
capacity (Hickel 2015; Donald and Way 2016; Scheyvens et al. 2016; 
Liverman 2018). Literature around trust in blended finance pinpoints 
four progress areas in accountability. First, debt transparency through 
public debt registries, centralised UN legacy debt restructuring and 
science-centred UN national statistical systems (Donaldson and 
Hawkes 2018; Jubilee Debt Campaign 2019; Stiglitz and Rashid 2020). 
Second, international reporting bell-weathers could be called upon to 
produce harmonised mandatory reporting frameworks that capitalise 
on TCFD to capture climate, debt sustainability (Section 15.6.7.3), SDG 
and fossil fuels (GISD 2020). Third, standardisation of assessment by 
third parties of the quantity and values of carbon saved by green 
projects (Hourcade et al. 2012) and of their contribution to quantified 
performance biodiversity targets (Finance for Biodiversity Initiative 
2021) to facilitate their bundling, securitisation and repackaging in 
standardised liquid products and bonds (Arezki et al. 2016; Blended 
Finance Taskforce 2018a).
Models and Financing Approaches
New and innovative business models and financing approaches have 
emerged to help overcome barriers related to transactions costs by 
aggregating and/or transferring financing needs and establishing 
supply of finance for stakeholder groups lacking financial inclusion 
(high confidence).
15.6.8.1 Service-based Business Models in the Energy 
and Transport Sectors
Energy as a service (EaaS) is a business model whereby customers 
pay for an energy service without having to make any upfront capital 
investment (PwC 2014; Hamwi and Lizarralde 2017; Cleary and 
Palmer 2019). EaaS performance-based contracts can also be a form 
of ‘creative financing; for capital improvement that makes it possible 
to fund energy upgrades from cost reductions and deployment 
of decentralised renewable energy (KPMG 2015; Moles-Grueso 
et al. 2021). Innovation in EaaS has started at the household level, 
where smart meters using real-time data are used to predict peak 
demand levels and optimise electricity dispatch (Chasin et al. 2020; 
Government of UK 2016; Smart Energy International 2018).
Aggregators. An aggregator is a  grouping of agents in a  power 
system to act as a  single entity when engaging in power system 
markets (MIT 2016). Aggregators can use operation optimisation 
platforms to provide real-time operating reserve capacity and 
a range of balancing services to integrate higher shares of variable 
renewable energy (Zancanella et  al. 2016; Ma et  al. 2017; Enbala 
2018; Research and Markets 2017; IRENA 2019b). This makes 
a  business case for deferred investments in grid infrastructure 
(medium confidence). Aggregating and managing demand-response 
of heat systems (micro CHP and heat pumps) has shown reduction in 
peak demand (TNO 2016).
Peer-to-peer (P2P) electricity trading. Producers and consumers 
can directly trade electricity with other consumers in an online 
marketplace to avoid the relatively high tariffs and the relatively 
low buy-back rates of traditional utilities (Liu et  al. 2019; IRENA 
2020f). P2P models trading with distributed energy resources reduce 
transmission losses and congestion (Mengelkamp et al. 2018; SEDA 
2020; Lumenaza 2020; Sonnen 2020; UNFCCC 2020).
Community ownership models. Community ownership models 
refer to the collective ownership and management of energy-related 
assets with lower levels of investment, usually distributed renewable 
energy resources but also recently in heating systems and energy 
services (e.g., storage and charging) (Gall 2018; IRENA 2018; Kelly 
and Hanna 2019; Singh et al. 2019; Bisello et al. 2021; Maclurcan and 
Hinton 2021). Community ownership projects may need significant 
upfront investments, and the ability of communities to raise the 
required financing might prove insufficient, which can be supported 
by microcredits in the initial stages of the projects (Aitken 2013; 
Federici 2014; REN21 2016; Rescoop 2020).Payment method: Pay-as-you-go (PayGo). PayGo business 
models emerged to address the energy access challenge and 
provide chiefly solar energy at affordable prices, using mobile 
telecommunication to facilitate payment through instalments;  Yadav 
et al. 2019). However, PayGo has the technology and product risk, 
requires a  financially viable and large customer base, and the 
system supplier must provide a significant portion of the finance 
and requires substantial equity and working capital (C40 Cities 
Climate Leadership Group 2018).
Transport sector business models. Analog to EaaS, mobility as 
a service (MaaS) offers a business model whereby customers pay for 
a  mobility service without making any upfront capital investment 
(e.g., buying a car). MaaS tends to deliver significant urban benefits 
(e.g., cleaner air) and brings in efficiency gains in the use of resources 
(high confidence). However, the switch to MaaS hardly improves the 
carbon footprint and further tempted on-demand mobility is likely 
to nurture carbon emissions (Suatmadi et  al. 2019). Therefore, to 
support climate change mitigation, MaaS must be integrated with 
the deployment of smart charging of electric (autonomous) vehicles 
coupled to renewable energy sources (IRENA 2019d; Jones and 
Leibowicz 2019).
Financial technology applications to climate change. Financial 
technology, abbreviated as ‘fintech’, applies to data-driven 
technological solutions that aim to improve financial services 
(Dorfleitner et al. 2017; Lee and Shin 2018; Schueffel 2018). Fintech 
can enhance climate investment in innovative financial products and 
build trust through data, but also presents some challenges including 
potentially significant emissions from increased energy use with 
distributed transactions (Lei et al. 2021). Blockchain is a key fintech 
that secures individual transactions in a  distributed system, which 
can have many applications with high impact potential but is also 
associated with uncertainty (OECD 2019c; World Energy Council 
2019). Fintech applications with climate change mitigation potential 
have been growing recently, including tracking payment or asset 
history for credit scoring in AFOLU activities (Nassiry 2018; Davidovic 
et al. 2019), blockchain supported grid transactions (Livingston et al. 
2018), carbon accounting throughout value chains (World Bank 
2018b), or transparency and verification mechanisms for green 
financial instrument investors (Kyriakou et al. 2017; Stockholm Green 
Digital Finance 2017). Generally, blockchain and digital currency 
applications are not well covered by governance systems (Tapscott 
and Kirkland 2016; Nassiry 2018), which could lead to problems with 
security (Davidovic et al. 2019), and some licensing and prudential 
supervision frameworks are in flux.
15.6.8.2 Nature-Based Solutions Including REDD+
Nature-based solutions are ‘actions to protect, sustainably manage 
and restore natural or modified ecosystems that address societal 
challenges effectively and adaptively, simultaneously providing 
human well-being and biodiversity benefits’ (Cohen-Shacham et al. 
2016). Nature-based solutions consist of a wide range of measures 
including ecosystem-based mitigation and adaptation.
is still limited. However, frameworks and schemes to incentivise 
the implementation of nature-based solutions, such as reducing 
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of 
conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement 
of forest carbon stocks in developing countries (REDD+), which 
contributes to climate change mitigation, has been actively 
discussed under the UNFCCC, with lessons from finance for REDD+ 
being available.
If effectively implemented, nature-based solutions can be cost-
effective measures and able to provide multiple benefits, such as 
enhanced climate resilience, enhanced climate change mitigation, 
biodiversity habitat, water filtration, soil health, and amenity values 
(high confidence) (Griscom et al. 2017; Keesstra et al. 2018; OECD 
2019d; Griscom et al. 2020; Dasgupta 2021).
Nature-based solutions have large potential to address climate 
change and other sustainable development issues (high confidence). 
Nature-based solutions are undercapitalised and the limited 
investment and finance, especially limited private capital, is widely 
recognised as one of the main barriers to the implementation and 
monitoring of the nature-based solutions (Seddon et  al. 2020; 
Toxopeus and Polzin 2021; UNEP et al. 2021) Finance and investment 
models that generate their own revenues or consistently save costs 
are necessary to reduce dependency on grants (Schäfer et al. 2019; 
Wamsler et al. 2020).
REDD+. REDD+ can significantly contribute to climate change 
mitigation and also produce other co-benefits like climate 
change adaptation, biodiversity conservation, and poverty reduction, 
if well-implemented (high confidence) (Milbank et al. 2018; Morita 
and Matsumoto 2018). We use the term REDD+ broadly, not limited 
to REDD+ implemented under the UNFCCC decisions, including 
Warsaw Framework for REDD+ (Chapter 14), but include voluntary 
REDD+ projects, such as projects which utilise voluntary carbon 
markets. Finance is a core element that incentivises and implements 
REDD+ activities. Various financial sources are financing REDD+ 
activities, including bilateral and multilateral, public and private, 
and international and domestic sources, with linking with several 
finance approaches/mechanisms including results-based finance 
and voluntary carbon markets (FAO 2018). However, there is lack 
of sufficient finance for REDD+ (Lujan and Silva-Chávez 2018; 
Maguire et  al. 2021). REDD+ under the UNFCCC is implemented 
in three phases: readiness, implementation, and results-based 
payment phases. The Ecosystem Marketplace identified that at least 
USD5.4 billion in REDD+ in three phases funding has been committed 
through multiple development finance institutions so far (Maguire 
et al. 2021), and public funds are main sources that are supporting 
three phases, and most of the REDD+ finance was spent on the 
readiness phase (Atmadja et al. 2018; Lujan and Silva-Chávez 2018; 
Watson and Schalatek 2021). There is a significant gap between the 
existing finance and finance needs of REDD+ in each phase (Lujan 
and Silva-Chávez 2018). Furthermore, private sector contributions to 
REDD+ are currently limited mostly to the project-scale payments for 
carbon offsets/units through voluntary carbon markets (McFarland 
2015; Lujan and Silva-Chávez 2018).Current main challenges of REDD+ finance include the uncertainty of 
compliance carbon markets (which allow regulated entities to obtain 
and surrender emissions allowances or offsets to meet regulatory 
emissions reduction targets) (Maguire et al. 2021), as well as limited 
engagement of the private sector in REDD+ finance (high confidence). 
With regard to the compliance carbon markets, at the international 
level, integrating climate cooperation through carbon markets into 
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and including REDD+ has potential 
to enable emission reduction in more cost-effective ways, while the 
links between carbon markets and REDD+ under Article 6 is under 
discussion at the UNFCCC (Environmental Defense Fund 2019; 
Maguire et al. 2021) (Chapter 14). At the national and subnational 
levels, although compliance carbon markets such as in New Zealand, 
Australia and Colombia allow forest carbon units, how REDD+ will 
be dealt in the national and subnational government-led compliance 
carbon markets is uncertain (Streck 2020; Maguire et al. 2021). As 
for limited engagement of the private sector in REDD+ finance, there 
are various reasons why mobilising more private finance in REDD+ is 
difficult (Dixon and Challies 2015; Laing et al. 2016; Golub et al. 2018; 
Ehara et al. 2019; Streck 2020). The challenges include the needs of 
a  clear understanding of carbon rights and transparent regulation 
on who can benefit from national REDD+ (Streck 2020); a  clear 
regulatory framework and market certainty (Dixon and Challies 2015; 
Laing et al. 2016; Golub et al. 2018; Ehara et al. 2019); strong forest 
governance (Streck 2020), and implementation of REDD+ activities 
at national and subnational levels. Other challenges are associated 
with the nature of forest-based mitigation activities, the costs and 
complexity of monitoring, reporting and verification of REDD+ 
activities, because of the need to consider the risks of permanence, 
carbon leakage, and precisely determine and monitor the forest 
carbon sinks (van der Gaast et al. 2018; Yanai et al. 2020). Although 
REDD+ has many challenges to mobilise more private finance, there 
is discussion on exploring other finance opportunities for the forest 
sector, such as building new blended finance models combining 
different funding sources like public and private finance (Streck 2016; 
Rode et al. 2019), and developing enhanced bonds for forest-based 
mitigation activities (World Bank 2017).
Private finance opportunities for nature-based solutions. The 
development of nature-based solutions faces barriers that relate to 
the value proposition, value delivery and value capture of nature-
based solutions business models and sustainable sources of public/
private finance to tap into (high confidence) (Toxopeus and Polzin 
2017; Mok et al. 2021). However, the demand for establishing new 
finance and business models to attract both public and private 
finance to nature-based solutions is increasing in a wide range of 
topics such as urban areas, forestry and agriculture sectors, and blue 
natural capital including mangroves and coral reefs (Toxopeus and 
Polzin 2017; EIB 2019; Cziesielski et al. 2021; Mok et al. 2021; Thiele 
et al. 2021; UNEP et al. 2021). Furthermore, the recognition of the 
needs of financial institutions to identify the physical, transition and 
reputational risks resulting from not only climate change but also loss 
of biodiversity is gradually increasing (De Nederlandsche Bank and 
PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency 2020; Dasgupta 
2021; TNFD 2021). Development of finance and business models for 
nature-based solutions needs to be explored, for example through 
utilising a  wide range of financial instruments (e.g.,  equity, loans, 
common characteristics for nature-based solutions to promote the 
creation of a new asset class (Thiele et al. 2021; UNEP et al. 2021).
15.6.8.3 Exploring Gender-responsive Climate Finance
Global and national recognition of the lack of finance for women has 
led to increasing emphasis on financial inclusion for women (high 
confidence). Currently, it is estimated that 980 million women are 
excluded from formal financial system (Miles and Wiedmaier-Pfister 
2018); and there is a  9% gender gap in financial access across 
developing countries (Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2018). This gender gap 
is the percentage difference between men and women with bank 
accounts as measured and reported in the Global Financial Inclusion 
(Global Findex) database. Policies and frameworks to expand and 
enhance financial inclusion also extend to the area of climate 
finance (high confidence). Since AR5, there remain many questions 
and not enough evidence on the gender, distribution and allocative 
effectiveness of climate finance in the context of gender equality and 
women’s empowerment (Williams M., 2015; Chan et al. 2018; Wong 
et al. 2019). Nonetheless, the existing global policy framework (entry 
points, policy priorities, etc.) of climate funds is gradually improving 
in order to support women’s financial inclusion in both the public 
and the private dimensions of climate finance/investment (Schalatek 
2015; Chan et  al. 2018; Schalatek 2020). At the level of public 
multilateral climate funds, there have been significant improvements 
in integrating gender equality and women’s empowerment 
issues in the governance structures, policies, project approval and 
implementation processes of existing multilateral climate funds such 
as the UNFCCC’s funds managed by the Global Environment Facility, 
the Green Climate Fund and the World Bank’s CIFs (high confidence) 
(Schalatek 2015; Williams M., 2015; Sellers 2016; GCF 2017). But 
according to a  recent evaluation report, the integration of gender 
into operational policies and programmes is fragmented and there is 
lack of an ‘adequate, systematic and comprehensive gender equality 
approach for the allocation and distribution of funds for projects 
and programmes on the ground’ (GEF Independent Evaluation 
Office 2017; Schalatek 2018). The review found that ‘almost half 
of the analysed sample of 70 climate projects were judged to be 
largely gender-blind, and only 5% considered to have successfully 
mainstreamed gender, including in two Least Developed Countries 
Fund adaptation projects’ (GEF Independent Evaluation Office 
2017; Schalatek 2018). While the GCF requires funding proposals 
to consider gender impact as part of their investment framework,16 
the fund does not have its own funding stream targeted to women’s 
project on the ground, nor is there as yet an evaluation as to how 
entities are actually implementing gender action plan in the projects. 
In the case of the CIFs, as noted by Schalatek (2018), ‘gender is not 
included in the operational principles of the Pilot Program on Climate 
Resilience (PPCR), which funds programmatic adaptation portfolios 
in a  few developing countries, although most pilot countries have 

planning, preparation and development stage and a gender and social inclusion action plan at the project preparation stage.

was launched December 2020 to support 180,000 underserved women and women entrepreneurs in the Asia Pacific region to respond, to recover from, and to build 
resilience in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic (Rockfeller Foundation and Shujog 2016; IIX 2020).included some gender dimensions’. And, ‘gender is not integrated into 
the operations of the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), which finances 
large-scale mitigation in large economies and accounts for 70% of 
the CIFs’ pledged funding portfolio of 8.2 billion USD’ (Schalatek 
2018). However, both the Forest Investment Program (FIP) and the 
Scaling-Up Renewable Energy in Low-Income Countries Program 
(SREP) have integrated gender equality as either a co-benefit or core 
criteria of these programmes (Schalatek 2018).
Overall, efforts to promote gender responsive/sensitive climate 
finance, at national and local levels, both in the public and private 
dimensions and more specifically in mitigation-oriented sectors such 
as clean and renewable energy, remain deficient (high confidence). 
Recent developments in the capital markets in the areas of social 
bond are focused around gender bonds – debt instruments targeted 
to activities and behaviours that are relevant to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. These bonds are aligned with Sustainability-
linked Bonds as well as Social Bonds Principles of the International 
Capital Market Association. Issuances of gender-labelled bonds 
are increasing in the Asia Pacific region (the most comprehensive 
initiative is the Impact Investment Exchange’s (IIX) multi-country 
USD150 million Women’s Livelihood Bond17) and in Latin America, 
Colombia, Mexico and Panama each have gender bond issuances). 
Additionally, a few developing countries, such as Pakistan (May 2021) 
and Morocco (March 2021) have issued gender bond guidelines for 
financial market participants.
Linkage to sectoral climate change issues and gender and 
climate finance. Subsets of actions designed to enhance women’s 
more formal integration into climate policies, programmes and 
actions by the global private sector include: investment in clean 
energy, redirecting funds to support women and vulnerable regions 
as a component of social and green bonds as well as insurance for 
climate risk management. In the latter context, insurance providers 
are arguing that ‘given the fact that women are disproportionately 
affected by climate change, there could be new finance innovations 
to address this gap’.(Miles and Wiedmaier-Pfister 2018). AXA 
and IFC estimate that the global women’s insurance market 
has the opportunity to grow to three times its current size, to 
UDS1.7  trillion by 2030 (AXA Group et  al. 2015; GIZ et  al. 2017). 
However, across the board, and in particular with regard to public 
funds, despite improvements in the substantive gender sensitisation 
and operational gender responsiveness of multilateral and bilateral 
climate finance funds operations, current flows of public and climate 
finance do not seem to be going to women and local communities 
in significant amounts (Chan et  al. 2018; Schalatek 2020). At the 
same time, evaluations of the effectiveness of climate finance show 
that equitable flow of climate finance can play an important role 
in levelling the playing field and in enabling women and men to 
successfully respond to climate change and to enable the success and 
sustainability of local response in ensuring effective and sustainable 
Agreement (Minniti and Naudé 2010; Bird et al. 2013; Barrett 2014; 
Eastin 2018). This is particularly, so in the case of female-owned MSMEs, who, the literature increasingly shows, are key to promoting 
resilience at micro and macro scale in many developing countries 
(Omolo et al. 2017; Atela et al. 2018; Crick, F . et al. 2018).
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
FAQ 15.1 |   What’s the role of climate finance and the finance sector for a transformation towards 
a sustainable future?
The Paris Agreement has widened the scope of all financial flows from climate finance only to the full alignment of finance flows 
with the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement. While climate finance relates historically to the financial support of developed 
countries to developing countries, the Paris Agreement and its Article 2.1(c) have developed a new narrative that goes much beyond 
traditional flows and relates to all sectors and actors. Finance flows are consistent when the effects are either neutral with or 
without positive climate co-benefits to climate objectives; or explicitly targeted to climate benefits in adaptation and/or mitigation 
result areas. Climate-related financial risk is still massively underestimated by financial institutions, financial decision-makers more 
generally and also among public sector stakeholders, limiting the sector’s potential of being an enabler of the transition. The private 
sector has started to recognise climate-related risks and consequently redirect investment flows. Dynamics vary across sectors and 
regions with the financial sector being an enabler of transitions in only some selected (sub-)sectors and regions. Consistent, credible, 
timely and forward-looking political leadership remains central to strengthen the financial sector as enabler.
FAQ 15.2 |   What’s the current status of global climate finance and the alignment of global 
financial flows with the Paris Agreement?
There is no agreed definition of climate finance. The term ‘climate finance’ is applied to the financial resources devoted to addressing 
climate change by all public and private actors from global to local scales, including international financial flows to developing 
countries to assist them in addressing climate change. Total climate finance includes all financial flows whose expected effect aims 
to reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and/or to enhance resilience to the impacts of current and projected climate change. 
This includes private and public funds, domestic and international flows and expenditures. Tracking of climate finance flows faces 
limitations, in particular for national climate finance flows.
Progress on the alignment of financial flows with low GHG emissions pathways remains slow. Annual global climate finance 
flows are on an upward trend since the Fifth Assessment Report, according to the Climate Policy Initiative reaching more than 
USD630 billion in 2019/2020, however, growth has likely slowed down and flows remain significantly below needs. This is driven 
by barriers within and outside the financial sector. More than 90% of financing is allocated to mitigation activities despite the 
strong economic rationale of adaptation action. Adjusting for higher estimates on current flows for energy efficiency based on 
International Energy Agency data, the dominance of mitigation becomes even stronger. Persistently high levels of both public and 
private fossil-fuel related financing as well as other misaligned flows continue to be of major concern despite recent commitments. 
Significant progress has been made in the commercial finance sector with regard to the awareness of climate risks resulting from 
inadequate financial flows and climate action. However, a more consequent investment and policy decision-making that enables 
a rapid redirection of financial flows is needed. Regulatory support as a catalyser is an essential driver of such redirections. Dynamics 
across sectors and regions vary, with some being better positioned to close financing gaps and to benefit from an enabling role of 
finance in the short-term.
FAQ 15.3 |  What defines a financing gap, and where are the critically identified gaps?
A financing gap is defined as the difference between current flows and average needs to meet the long-term goals of the Paris 
Agreement. Gaps are driven by various barriers inside (short-termism, information gaps, home bias, limited visibility of future 
pipelines) and outside (e.g., missing pricing of externalities, missing regulatory frameworks) of the financial sector. Current mitigation 
financing flows come in significantly below average needs across all regions and sectors despite the availability of sufficient capital 
on a global basis. Globally, yearly climate finance flows have to increase by a factor between three and six to meet average annual 
needs between 2020 and 2030.
Gaps are in particular concerning for many developing countries, with COVID-19 exacerbating the macroeconomic outlook and 
fiscal space for governments. Also, limited institutional capacity represents a key barrier for many developing countries, burdening 
risk perceptions and access to appropriately priced financing as well as limiting their ability to actively manage the transformation. 
Existing fundamental inequities in access to finance, as well as its terms and conditions, and countries’ exposure to physical impacts 
of climate change, overall result in a worsening outlook for a global just transition.